Have I ever shown you my Mickey Mouse
impression? [laughter]
>> You've done your uh Mario impression for
me in the past, but I'm not.
>> They're a little similar. [laughter]
>> All right. All right. Give me Give me
Mickey. Give me Mickey.
>> Oh, boy. Will you look at that?
[laughter]
>> That is really good. You sound like Walt
himself doing Mickey,
>> right? Didn't he do Mickey for like 20
years?
>> Yep. Yep. Yep. He didn't at the very
first and then one of the animators
convinced him to do it and then yeah, he
did it for 20 years.
>> Have I ever given you my Donald Duck
impression?
>> Oh wow. Okay. Well, now I I do I need to
sit down for this one?
>> You you might need to. All right. Here
we go.
[laughter]
That's about right. That's about right.
I have a great Donald Durbia for you
coming up. Save it.
>> All right. Save it. Save it.
>> You're going to be blown away. I'm
pretty sure you didn't find it.
>> Great. All right. On to the episode.
Let's do it.
>> Who got the [music] truth?
Is it you? Is it you? Is it you? Who got
the truth now?
Is it you? Is it you? Is it you? Sit me
down. [music] Say it straight. Another
story on the way.
>> Welcome to the spring 2026 season of
Acquired, the podcast about great
companies and the stories and playbooks
behind them. I'm Ben Gilbert.
>> I'm David Rosenthal.
>> And we are your hosts today. listeners,
we finally tell the story of the Walt
Disney Company. Unbelievably, in 11
years of doing Acquired, we have never
told Walt's story and uh it's been a
glaring omission. It is the
entertainment company different than all
the rest. It's over a hundred years old
and it has played a prominent role in
almost all of your childhoods and if
you're a parent, likely your parenting
journey, too.
>> Oh, yes.
>> I'm looking at you, David Rosenthal. Oh
yes, and it has played a prominent role
in acquired history too. Our very first
episode, Pixar, done Lucasfilm, we've
done Marvel, done ESPN, although those
are a whole different version of
Acquired, we may need to decanonize
those and and redo them uh the proper
way
>> as part of this.
>> Listeners, since there are tons of
biographies and documentaries and places
analyzing Walt's psyche, we're going to
focus today on Acquired Sweet Spot,
which is the business. What is it that
Walt's merry band did from the 1920s
onward that made them succeed uniquely
well in Hollywood? And when you look at
Disney's profits today, it is in a whole
different league than Paramount or
Universal or Warner Brothers or any of
the other sort of classic Hollywood
studios. The business of feature film
production is a mediocre one, especially
by the standards of uh what we study on
this show here with Acquired, except for
Disney.
>> Yes, exactly. And I will say I am a huge
Disney fan. I grew up on Aladdin and the
Lion King. My first movie in theaters
was Beauty and the Beast. I'm a huge
Star Wars nerd and my wall was plastered
with Toy Story posters growing up. But
somehow I knew nothing about the
company's early history before starting
this research. Nor did I. For example,
it started in Kansas City. there was a
character that was supposed to be Mickey
Mouse before Mickey Mouse but was lost
in a contract dispute or that many of
the movies I watched in my childhood are
actually from 50 years before I was even
born. Snow White was produced before
World War II. Pinocchio, Bambi, these
films are from the 30s and 40s. They
even predate the existence of
televisions in people's homes. Yep. And
importantly for Acquired's roots, this
really is a technology story. Giant
innovations that often bet the whole
company on things like synchronized
sound or the crazy idea of a
featurelength animated movie at all or
the multiplane camera to photograph the
whole thing and turn it into a movie.
And of course, building a giant theme
park in Anaheim when nothing else like
it existed. And they really did invent
the entire concept of the flywheel
business model that so many
entrepreneurs are trying to copy.
>> Oh yes.
>> So today listeners is the Walt Disney
Company part one Walt's era. Woo.
>> Well, big news from here at Acquired HQ.
This episode has a companion PDF with
visuals, charts, tables, and
illustrations of key concepts, including
Acquired's version of the Disney
flywheel. We did a pilot of the idea
after our Vanguard episode and we got
such overwhelming positive response that
we are doing it again. So, you can get
access and follow along by clicking the
link in the show notes.
>> You might say we're uh building out our
own flywheel here.
>> We are
>> eating our own episode cooking
>> and we're we're taking this timeless IP
that we are developing and figuring out
even more things to do with it.
>> That's right.
>> All right. So, you can join the acquired
email list at acquired.fm/e.
That's where we'll send our big
takeaways from each episode, past
episode corrections, exclusive
behind-the-scenes photos that we found
at our research, and it's where you can
vote on future episode topics. Plus, we
will give away a little hint each time
about the next episode topic. That's
acquired.fm/e.
Come talk about this episode with us in
the Slack. That's acquired.fm/slack.
And before we dive in, we want to thank
our presenting partner JP Morgan. Yes,
just like how we say every company has a
story, every company's story is powered
by payments and JP Morgan is a part of
so many of their journeys from seed to
IPO and beyond. So with that, the show
is not investment advice. David and I
may have investments in the companies we
discuss and this show is forformational
and entertainment purposes only. David,
take us in. Well, first a thank you to
my main source for facts and Walt quotes
on this episode. Neil Gabler's
biography, Walt Disney, the triumph of
the American imagination. Gabler, I
think, was the only author who had full
access to the Disney archives and all
the research he did for that book is
just incredible.
>> Yes. Well, with that, we start in
Chicago in December 1901 where Walter
Elias Disney is born. And the family
lore is that the Disneys are descended
from the French Disneys of Normandy.
>> How do you spell that?
>> D apostrophe I si G nys of Normandy who
came over to England with William the
Conqueror in 1066.
That's family lore. unverifiable.
>> Yes. At this point, lost to history.
>> Yes. So, Walt's father, Elias, was sort
of a frustrated entrepreneur. He was
variously a carpenter, landlord, farmer,
newspaper route owner, and eventually a
failed jelly factory investor.
But Elias's younger brother, Robert,
Walt's uncle Robert, was the successful
one in the family. He was a real estate
speculator among other things and that
is what brought the family to Chicago at
the turn of the century. He had invested
in a bunch of real estate in Chicago and
the Midwest and so Elias came also to
seek his fortune there. Now, when Walt
is four, Elias moves the family out of
Chicago to an idyllic farm town, also in
the Midwest, where Robert had just
purchased another tract of real estate,
Marceline, Missouri. And Lily and
Disney, Walt's future wife, would say
about Marceline, "It was the most
important part of Walt's life. He didn't
live there very long. He lived in
Chicago and Kansas City much longer. But
there was something about the farm that
was very important to him.
>> And Elias moved the family because it
was kind of like let's get out of the
dangerous city of Chicago and raise the
kids, right? So sort of somewhere small
town. I think Marceline was actually
created because they needed somewhere
for the Santa Fe Railroads division
point.
>> Yes. Yes.
>> Like when it was going to maybe Chicago
and Kansas City and they were like and
this place on the map looks good and
they started the town of Marceline.
Exactly. Exactly. And Robert, the uncle
had bought real estate there, kind of
speculating again that this is
Marceline's gonna grow.
>> So Marceline was like basically a Disney
movie. There's orchards and ponds and
animals and farmhouses. There's also
this charming little town that the
railroad had created with a main street,
a main street USA, you might say. But
that's getting ahead of ourselves. So,
while the family's living there, Uncle
Robert's wife, Walt's aunt Maggie, every
time that they would come visit
Marceline to check up on their real
estate investments, she would bring Walt
gifts. And one year when Walt is
probably six or seven years old, Aunt
Maggie brings him a big chief drawing
tablet and pencil set. And Walt is
enraptured. He starts sketching all the
time, drawing, sketching everything he
can see. And as the legend goes, one day
Walt's retired neighbor asks the young
boy to draw him a picture of his
favorite horse. And the neighbor loves
what Walt draws so much that he pays him
a nickel for it. And he hangs it in a
frame in his house. And Walt, his mind
is blown, young Walt. He's like, "My my
hobby, my my art, it can make me money."
[laughter]
Now, whatever the exact truth of that
story is, there is no doubt that
somewhere in Marceline, in prepubescent
Walt's mind, a connection is forged
between these two great forces, art and
commerce. And that would go on to drive
not only the rest of his life, but the
company, the studio, the movies. I mean,
change America.
>> Absolutely. The thing about Marceline
though, you said it's idyllic and like
it's out of a Disney movie. The reality
of living in Marceline and life on the
farm is that it was very hard. All the
kids are involved. There's not, you
know, magical economic prosperity
everywhere. It's sort of a tough life.
Even though he can sort of remember it
as an idyllic childhood, which I also
think is quite the foreshadow of kind of
the Disney versionification of things in
the future, it is both remembered as
idyllic but also was hard as the real
world is. Yes. And I think it's because
of the age wall was when he was there.
So they lived in Marceline only from
when he was like 4 [snorts] to 8 or nine
years old before he gets really put to
work. So he gets to just enjoy, you
know, all this bliss around him. Yeah.
The reality is it's pretty tough for the
family to make a living. And in fact,
they can't. So Elias adds farming to his
list of entrepreneurial failures. And
when Walt is 9 years old, they have to
move the family again out of Marceline
to Kansas City where Elias decides he's
going to purchase a paper delivery route
for the Kansas City Star newspaper and
he's going to put the family to work
[laughter]
delivering papers.
>> There are so many protagonists that we
study unacquired who started their
career as newspaper boys. I was going to
say just like Jack Bogle from Vanguard
delivering papers in his youth and
having to get up at 4 in the morning and
falling asleep at school because he has
to work so hard. Like this is quite the
reversal here for Walt from Marceline.
But he never stops drawing and he never
stops making money from it. In Kansas
City, he would draw frames for the local
barber shop who would pay him either a
nickel or a free haircut for each. And
that would, you know, be Walt's spending
money growing up that he would earn from
his art.
>> Yep. So later when Walt enters high
school, Elias moves the family back to
Chicago again, this time for the Jelly
Factory, which ends up failing, where
Walt becomes the cartoonist for his high
school newspaper. But he's not there
long before he leaves high school to go
join the Red Cross and get shipped off
to France as an ambulance driver during
World War I where unfortunately he would
acquire a chain smoking habit that he
would keep up for the rest of his life
and eventually would kill him way too
young. Yep. But Walt's not in France for
long before the war ends. And in the
fall of 1919, he lands back in Kansas
City where Roy Disney, his older
brother, who is, I think, eight years
his senior.
>> Nine years, maybe.
>> Eight, nine years older.
>> Yeah. Much older.
>> Yep. Is living. And Walt has a plan that
he's going to seek his fortune finally
as a true professional cartoonist. So,
through Roy, he gets introduced to an
advertising art shop that's looking for
apprentices to help draw like flyers for
the upcoming holiday rush. And Walt
works there for six weeks through
Christmas time and then gets
unceremoniously laid off. But he gets
two things out of this brief experience
as an employee. One, he gets a
credential. He can now say that he is a
professional artist.
>> All you have to do is get paid to do
something and then you become a
professional.
>> Exactly. Exactly. And you get something
else, a co-founder,
another young apprentice from the art
shop named Eyeworks.
>> I sort of think of as the Steve Waznjak
of Disney.
>> Yes, absolutely. Walt is like the
original Steve Jobs. And I think you can
definitely make the case that is the
Steve Waznjak.
>> Although I think Walt was more hands-on.
Yes, Walt was also an animator. was just
a better animator and Walt was a camera
operator and Walt was building stuff,
doing things with his hand and he was in
the primary technology and artistic
trade that his business was in. So after
the two of them get laid off, Walt
suggests that rather than go look for
jobs again, they should just start their
own studio together. I mean, hey,
they're professional artists. Like, why
not? [laughter and gasps] So, they
create I works Disney Commercial Artists
Incorporated.
supposedly in that naming order so that
it didn't sound like a optometrist shop
like Disney Eyeworks.
>> How amazing is this? In the first
Eyeworks and Disney partnership, in Walt
Disney's first business, he was not the
main name on the door. At least he was
not the first one.
>> Yes. Not the main name on the door, but
he is the driving force behind the
business. So he goes out to pitch
prospective clients around Kansas City
for the uh services of this new I works
Disney commercial artist firm and one of
the clients that he goes to pitch is a
upandcoming company called the Kansas
City Slide Company which happens to have
become the country's largest producer of
advertising slides and short commercials
that would get shown in movie theaters
feature films and the slide has so much
work at this point in time as films and
movie theaters are are taking off around
the country that they say hey you guys
seem talented we don't want to just
contract with you why don't you come
work here full-time so Walt and first
entrepreneurial venture quickly comes to
an end and they go join the slide
company now the reason that they
specifically wanted Walt and is that
they have a relatively new business line
at the slide co which is producing
animated commercials to run in movie
theaters before films and this is what
Walt and end up getting put to work
doing and they both just fall in love
with this new art form of animation.
It's like everything that Walt and Obubu
loves about drawing but it's more than
just art. It's technology. You know, you
need cameras, you need film, you need
all these new inventions to make
animation happen.
>> Yep. And at this point, animation was
really primarily used in advertising,
right? There wasn't really a successful
thriving industry yet as entertainment
of its own based on animation. It was
like very very early and to the extent
that it did exist as entertainment and
shorts, short films, cartoons on its
own, it was all based in New York, like
not in Kansas City,
>> right?
>> But the whole industry is only like
barely 20 years old at this point in
time because you couldn't produce
animation on any sort of scale until you
had widespread commercially available
film cameras and film projectors. Like
this whole art form is brand new. It
couldn't exist before the technological
innovation of film.
>> Yep. It's exactly right.
>> So, part of the reason that cartoons are
working well in advertising right now
for the slide co is that it's this
novelty, you know, almost gimmick. It
captures people's attention.
>> Yep.
>> Even though they have no color, no
sound, no story, it's just a series of
like visual novelties.
>> It's something they never seen before.
Of course, it's interesting.
>> Yep. And in Walt's mind, who really is
always thinking about how can I, you
know, make a business out a career out
of this, this is also what makes it
super attractive to him, because the
whole industry is so new of animation,
he figures that he can quickly become as
good or better than anyone else in the
world at it. Unlike if he's going to try
and be the best commercial artist in the
world, you know, good luck, young Walt
Disney in Kansas City, Missouri.
>> Oil painting is thousands of years old.
>> Right. Right. Right. But becoming the
best cartoon animator,
>> small pool. Yeah, he and might have a
shot here.
>> Yep.
>> So, Walt and start experimenting on
nights and weekends with their own work,
just trying out creating their own
animations using the Slide Co. equipment
and cameras. And Walt puts together a
few short cartoons that he creates all
himself. He brands them as quote
laughogs
and he ends up selling them on the side
to a local movie theater chain to run
before features and the laughs become a
hit in Kansas City. Audiences love them.
>> I love that the thing that led to the
Walt Disney Company is called Laugh Oog.
It reminds me of uh what was the Rolex
watch? The Turnograph.
>> Oh yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's such a like
hokey name for, you know, what ends up
becoming
>> well, this doesn't become Disney, but
the spirit of which becomes Disney here.
>> And the thing that they're doing,
they're so primitive. There's no sound,
there's no voices, there's no color,
there's barely backgrounds.
>> Yeah. It's so different from what you're
used to today. Because of those
limitations, you can't create a story or
a real sense of character for any of the
characters that are in there. Like you
can't build a relationship with the
cartoons that are being made at this
time like you can with Mickey Mouse or
Donald or Goofy or Minnie.
>> The only emotion you can invoke is
humor. And the only real way to do humor
is slapstick. So it's just these like
super exaggerated, they call them gags,
like things that a character does that
isn't necessarily consistent with
anything else that they've done within a
few minutes of starting gag happening
and ending or or or sometimes even a few
seconds. Yep. And honestly, that's
actually not that different than film
itself overall at this point in time.
Like Charlie Chaplan is the big star in
America and around the world, the big
movie star right now in the silent era.
>> And most of his movies are exactly what
you described, Ben.
>> Honestly, it's all physical comedy, sort
of slapstick. It's the stuff that my
toddler laughs at. You could resummarize
every scene of every comic and most
movies by going, "Oh, he fell down.
>> [laughter]
>> Exactly.
[gasps]
Ah, so in May of 1922 at 20 years old,
Walt decides that these laughs that he's
making are having enough success that
he's ready to leave the slide company,
go out on his own again and he founds
Laugh Films, Inc. And once again, he
convinces a bi works to quit and come
along too along with a few other
animators from the slide company. And
it's another failure because despite the
laugh's local popularity there in Kansas
City, by the time we get into 22, 1923,
animation and cartoons in general around
the country are starting to lose their
appeal. The novelty is wearing off. the
fad is dying down. There's actually a
survey of theater managers right around
this time in like 1922 or 1923 where one
of the questions is what filler options
do your audiences like to see around the
feature film that you're showing because
it also would be news reels or live
comedies or short serals. Remember,
there's no television. There's not even
really radio at this point in time. If
you want to get news or any kind of
entertainment, you go to the movie
theater.
>> All right, I got a stat on this. In the
1920s, the average American went over 40
times per year to the theater.
>> Wow.
>> This is what you did every week for
entertainment.
>> Wow. Yeah. Compare that to today where
like maybe you go once a year.
>> It's two the American the average
American goes to a movie theater twice a
year now.
>> Yeah. I mean, back then it was like you
could go to the movie theater or you
could go see a live show, ballet or
opera or or like a sporting event like a
baseball game or you go to the movie
theater. That's it. And when you go to
the theater, it was a bundle. I mean,
yeah, you were there for a production,
but I think the point you're trying to
make is there were also these cartoons
with gags. There were news reels. There
was the feature you're there to see, but
it's sort of this like bundle of all
right, let's see what the theater has in
store for me today.
>> Yeah, exactly. So, this survey of
theater managers, only 23% of
respondents say that they show cartoons
as part of the bundle and that their
audiences like it, which is by far the
lowest of any of the other filler
options. So, Laugh can't really find a
market outside of their local popularity
in Kansas City. And in 1923, the company
goes bankrupt and shuts down. And Walt
is now this sort of 1.5 times disgraced
entrepreneur here in Kansas City.
>> Right in his dad's footsteps.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly.
>> And he raised money from people in
Kansas City, friends, family. He he went
and lost people's loan capital that they
gave him.
>> Yep. So Walt goes to rich uncle Robert
for advice on what to do given his
failure. And Robert says, "You know,
kid, best thing to do if I were you, I
would just skip town. Get [laughter] out
of there."
Which actually is really sound advice
for back then. You know, people's
reputations did not travel with them.
>> Nope. Your credit was the credit locally
that you had with the people in your
town and no other way to find you
otherwise. Now, it just so happens that
both Robert and Walt's older brother,
Roy, have just also skipped town from
Kansas City and moved out west to Los
Angeles. So, Walt packs his belongings,
which is basically nothing at this point
in time, hops aboard the Santa Fe train
bound for LA, and joins them in
Hollywood. And when he arrives there in
the summer of 1923, he's 21 years old.
He stays with Uncle Robert and
initially, you really can't make this
up. I I couldn't believe this when I
read it. Wall at first thinks that he's
come to Hollywood. He's going to get a a
directing job in Hollywood at one of the
studios there.
>> Well, yeah, he has abandoned the idea of
animation. He basically thinks he's too
late. He's seen some of the stuff that
comes out of the New York cartooning
scene and he's like, "Well, I'll never
be as good as them, so I need to go
start over something completely new,
right?" Which is sort of, you know,
silly and wrong in of its own. But also
like the hubris that he thinks that he
could just show up in Hollywood with no
directorial experience and become the
next DW Griffith. That is Walt for you.
>> Do you know the story of the Universal
Lot?
>> No. No. No. So, he rolls up to the
Universal lot after getting there,
having no job, no money, borrowing a
bed, and he goes and has fake business
cards made that says he is with
Universal. He's just the Kansas City
representative, so no one at Universal
would really know who he is. And he
gives it to the receptionist on the
Universal lot. And he walks in. And so
he spends at least a day from what I
could tell roaming around and learning
as much as he could about film
production and like internalizes a lot
of those lessons. And then he tries to
come back in future days and say like,
"Oh yeah, I'm sort of like with
Universal and now I have experience and
can you give me a job?" And he ends up
running out of money and doesn't get a
job.
>> That is amazing. I didn't [laughter]
know that story.
So once he inevitably gets rejected at
all the major Hollywood studios, he says
later, "When things began to look
hopeless, I got my cartoon things out
again." And he sets up shop animating
again. He's like, "Well, as you said,
Ben, this is the one thing I know how to
do. I should try that." And at this
point, pretty much the only popular
cartoon left in the industry is Felix
the Cat.
>> Yep.
>> Which is created by Pat Sullivan out of
New York and distributed by the
pioneering Margaret Winkler, also in New
York. So Walt has one thing, one asset
left over from his failed laugh days,
which is a real of a hybrid liveaction
cartoon short that he had created with
right before he left Kansas City called
Alice's Wonderland about a real life
little girl who interacts on screen with
cartoons that they've drawn over the
film. which is like completely
pioneering technology. The the other
people who were doing animation at this
time were just doing cartoons. These
Alice comedies as they came to be called
were a new process by which you could go
and film a real life actor and then have
them interact on screen with cartoon
characters and put them in the cartoon.
>> Yes. Very cool. and also had the unique
property of being cheaper to produce
than full animation because you only had
to animate the characters, not all the
backgrounds and everything.
>> Right.
>> Right. Yeah. There is this funny
counterintuitive thing that live
production is much faster and cheaper
than animation. You just have a film
camera and you point it at something in
the world that exists and you kind of
get everything that you're pointing it
at for free. like the interring
around you and you taking these
exposures in a video camera.
>> Yep.
>> So, Walt sends Alice's Wonderland off to
Winkler and she likes it. So, she
commisss Walt to create 12 more Alice
comedies for like 15 to $1,800 each.
>> She does. And David, did you know we
have seen this contract? [laughter]
>> Was this in the documents that we saw in
the Disney archives?
>> Yes. So, listeners, for this episode,
David and I went and spent a few days
down in Burbank looking through the
corporate archives. And one of the
things that the archavist pulled for us
was this contract. And I have a photo of
it. I'm looking at it right now.
agreement entered into this 16th day of
October 1923 between Walt Disney of 4406
Kingswell Avenue, Hollywood, California,
blah blah blah blah blah. And yeah,
you're exactly right for 12 negatives of
subject series and then in all caps
Alice comedies and
>> amazing
>> this we I also have a picture of this on
the last page of this contract cuz this
is effectively the contract that puts
Disney in business. I mean this becomes
the Walt Disney Company.
>> Yeah, this is the moment. This is the
beginning of Disney. You can see his
signature which is much less flowery
than the version that you see in the the
Disney logo. He would sort of evolve it
over time.
>> But yeah, this is the moment. Disney
Walt is in business. It's his first
actual commercial big-time deal.
>> Yes. And I think when Walt sort of gets
word from Margaret, he runs into his
brother's room. His brother Roy actually
has tuberculosis at this time. It is in
like a hospital ward. and he sort of
runs in, shows him the contract, and
says, "We got it. We got it. We got it.
We're in business. We're doing it." And,
you know, $15 to $1,800 a film is a lot
of money at this time. And Roy talks
through with him, and says, "Okay, let's
get right to work." And he literally
stands up and leaves the hospital ward.
He's like, "All right, my tuberculosis
is behind me."
>> And the two of them found the Disney
Brothers cartoon studio right there in
October 1923.
as a true partnership between the
brothers. Roy manages the business and
the finance. Walt manages the creative
and they get to work.
>> Yep.
>> So Walt of course writes I works back in
Kansas City and several of the other
talented animators that they knew there
and says, "All right, guys. [laughter]
I I got it this time. Come on out to
California. We finally got a deal. We're
going to build a real company and a real
animation studio.
>> And they do. The behemoth we know as
Disney today is the Disney Brothers
cartoon studio and a whole bunch of
Kansas City guys that moved out to join
Walt to start cranking away.
>> Yep. And the Alice comedies become a
moderate success in the marketplace.
Again, I think the novelty of cartoons
plus live animation. and audiences are
entertained for a few years. Ultimately,
the Disney Brothers Studio produces 57
of the Alice comedies from 1923 to 1927.
And then in 1927,
Winkler's relatively new husband,
Charles Mintz, who actually got to start
working for her in the business. By this
point in time, he has taken over as sort
of head of the business. He is no longer
getting along with Pat Sullivan, the
creator of Felix the Cat.
>> Big opportunity.
>> Big opportunity. And And he has brokered
a little arrangement with Universal
Pictures, the big New York film
distributor, to on the Sly create a new
character to rival Felix. Now, now mind
you, he and Winkler are still the
distributor for Felix, for Sullivan, and
they're creating a new character to
compete with him on the side.
>> Sort of like they're building their own
chips while still buying Nvidia.
>> Yeah. [laughter]
Uh, and so he turns around and haps
Disney says, "Hey, Walt, can you make us
a new series and a new character? You
know, like Felix, but but not Felix.
Like like maybe not a cat,
>> right? We needed to be plausibly
different while still having everything
that made Felix successful.
>> Yes. So, Walt and cast about what can we
come up with that's like a cat but maybe
shares a lot of the same recognizable
attributes like, you know, a lot of
white fur, a tail, some big ears, easy
to draw in black and white. And they
come up not with Mickey Mouse, but with
Oswald the Lucky Rabbit.
And Oswald is a big hit. It's got the
backing of Universal distribution behind
it. It's a big hit for Universal, a big
hit for Winkler and Mintz, and a big hit
for the Disney Brothers cartoon studio.
And it's not surprising because if you
give the creative brief to Walt and take
something that's kind of working, but
apply your style. Their style was great.
I mean, they were emotional animators.
There's a great quote in the book Walt
Disney and American Original by Bob
Thomas that says, "Before Disney,
cartoons were slapdash. Two-dimensional
characters in bizarre movement before
elemental backgrounds. Disney insisted
on rounded humanized figures. He wanted
the humor to come out of the character,
not the outrageous action." So, it's
sort of like, hey, here's the template,
but dnify it or I workify it in a way
that really can speak to people. Well, I
think it really was the partnership of
the two of them. I think I works had
like immense artistic talent as an
animator and was able to do that and
Walt had taste like he recognized it and
he knew when and where to apply it.
>> Yep. So on the back of the Oswald
success, the Disney Brothers cartoon
studio grows pretty quickly from this
ragtag group from Kansas City to like a
real operation, like a real, you know,
at this point bordering on major
animation studio. They hire about 25
employees and start turnurning out
Oswald cartoons. Yep. They move into a
real studio building on Hyperion Avenue
in the Silver Lake neighborhood of Los
Angeles. And when they move there, Walt
and Roy decide at a unclear which
brothers instigation that they need to
rename the company and the studio from
the Disney Brothers Cartoon Studio to
the Walt Disney Studio. So, there's two
stories about this.
>> I was going to say I've seen both.
>> One is that it was actually Royy's idea.
>> Yes. [laughter] because he's like, "Hey,
you know, we need to start building a
brand and like people need to know who
is making these Oswalds and it should be
the Walt Disney Studio
>> and you're very clearly the frontman.
You know, you're selling. You're the
visionary. You're the sort of creative
talent and this is a creative company.
Of course, it should be you."
>> Yep. The other story is that Waltz
always had a dream since he got to
Hollywood of having his name up on a
neon sign.
>> [laughter]
>> now that they have their own real
studio. He wants a neon sign constructed
that says the Walt Disney Studio,
[laughter]
which I think does happen.
>> Yes, we'll put the photo in the email.
The Hyperion Avenue studio has this
really cool sign or did for a long time
before it got knocked down and I think
it's a strip mall or something today.
And in that vein, now that the studio
has become a real operation, Walt moves
from actually doing a lot of the
animation and camera work mostly to
overseeing the studio, which you have to
with an operation of 25 artists and
creative people and camera folks. You
need someone who has an overall vision
and taste to drive everything. Yep.
>> Now, as Walt is transitioning from, you
know, sort of doer to really studio head
>> and worth knowing, the ownership of Walt
Disney Studios that would become Walt
Disney Productions that would become the
Walt Disney Company was at this point
60% owned by Walt and his wife and 40%
owned by Roy and his wife.
>> Yep. So Mintz, the husband of Winkler
back in New York, who has, you know,
sort of already proved his stripes by
his dealings with Felix the Cat and Pat
Sullivan, he senses another opportunity.
He thinks that Walt has become
superfluous and that it's actually just
the animators who really matter. And
because the Walt Disney Studio doesn't
actually own the IP of Oswald the Lucky
Rabbit, Universal does,
>> although the Walt Disney Studio was was
acting like this was sort of their
creation that they owned.
>> Yeah. I don't think Walt uh or Roy
really read the fine print on the
contracts here. So, in early 1928,
Walt and his wife Lillian, who Lillian
also was an early studio employee
>> in the Ink and Paint Department. That's
right.
>> We'll get to that.
>> They make a fateful trip as a couple to
New York, where one of the items on the
agenda is for Walt to go meet with Mintz
and ask for a raise in the amount that
the studio is getting paid per Oswald
Short. So Walt sits down with Mintz and
Mintz is like, "Well,
I don't know about paying you more. I
don't think I like that idea. In fact,
I'm not even really sure, Walt, what you
are doing around here any longer. But I
tell you what, I'm a nice guy. I'm
willing to let you and your little
studio stay involved here and keep
making the Oswalds, but we're going to
have to pay you less, not more. like
$500 per cartoon
less,
>> which my understanding is that basically
wiped out the margin and they were
saying we'll pay you cost to make these
Oswald cartoons.
>> Yeah, I think Mintz had basically
calculated, okay, if Walt takes this,
then I'm willing to let his studio keep
making it, and if he doesn't take it,
then it's all equal to me. I'm just
going to steal his animators and go make
it myself. And crucially, before this
meeting even happens,
>> he's already stolen the animators.
>> Mint has an ace in the hole. He has, I
think, signed contracts with nearly all
the animators except Eyeworks. He has
sort of through an act of subtrafuge
gotten in touch with each of them
individually and brought them over.
>> Yeah. only and and I think maybe two or
three other animators refused to sign
these secret deals with Mintz and stayed
loyal to to Walt and to Roy. Once Walt
realizes this, there's nothing he can
do. Like, it's a free country. He can't
force his animators to stay. He doesn't
have employment contracts with them. And
he also doesn't have any control or
rights to the actual Oswald IP. So, he
has no leverage. He's got nothing. He's
got no customer contract. He's got no
employees. He's got no intellectual
properties. Suddenly, the enterprise
value, so that the the entire value of
Walt Disney Studios is effectively zero.
Yep. It is a extremely bitter lesson for
Walt and for Roy. And it is one that you
can bet they never forget for the rest
of their lives. And really like
everything in Disney's history and all
of the enterprise value that Disney has
built that we will see all across the
rest of this episode traces back to this
moment.
>> It's a hard reaction to this lesson.
>> Totally. I have a fun bit of trivia for
you, Ben.
>> Oo.
>> So, as I think you know, Disney
eventually does get the rights to Oswald
back.
>> This is gonna be my trivia for you,
[laughter]
>> right? Actually, ask your question. We
might have different takes on it. Disney
eventually does get the rights to Oswald
back in 2006.
>> Bob Iger, one of his first acts as CEO,
did the deal.
>> Yes. Do you know how Bob got Oswald back
for Disney?
>> So, let's see. By this point, Disney had
acquired ABC.
>> Yep.
>> And had acquired ESPN.
>> And who owned Oswald at this point? It
was Universal, which was owned by NBC,
which is now owned by Comcast.
>> Correct. So, there's a ABC asset that
Bob effectively trades in exchange for
Oswald. And I think that ABC ESPN Monday
Night Football asset is Al Michaels.
>> Al Michaels, the Monday Night Football
commentator, [laughter]
like a sports team trade to NBC in
exchange for the IP rights to Oswald the
Rabbit.
>> And Oswald is repatriated and NBC gets
Al Michaels and all is right in the
world. Amazing.
So, back to 1928. Walt and Roy are
basically back at square one here. They
have not really just nothing. They
actually have less than nothing because
Mintz ever the uh well really just kind
of weasel is the right word.
>> Yeah.
He makes Walt and Walt Disney Studios
finish out the current Oswald contract,
which still had a few cartoons left to
animate on it, and pay all of the
animators who had all betrayed him and
were all about to defect. Mince is like,
"No, no, you've got a contract. You're
going to keep paying these folks while
they finish up the last couple shorts on
this brutal contract." Just brutal.
absolutely
humiliating for Walt. And so then, as
legend has it, on the long, long train
ride back home from New York, Walt is
struck by a bolt of inspiration. And he
scribbles a sketch for a new cartoon
character right there on his drawing pad
on the train trip. a character that
wouldn't just reverse all the woes of
the Oswalds and turn around the
company's fortune, but would maybe
become
one of, if not the most recognized
figure in all of human history. But
before we tell the story of Mickey
Mouse, now is a great time to thank our
friends at JP Morgan.
>> Yes, our presenting partner. So today we
are sharing a story from one of JP
Morgan's partners and a company that you
may know, Bill, which is formerly
Bill.com. Right. Bill is the financial
operations platform for half a million
small and midsize businesses, what they
call the Fortune 5 million. They help
manage and maximize cash flow for SMB
companies. And Bill's Divvyard product
is what employees at those businesses
use to fund their operations day-to-day.
So, uh, here's a scenario that many
listeners may have experienced. Someone
on your team maxes out the credit line
on their corporate card with an
unexpected purchase. You send a wire to
pay off the card so you can continue
using it, but it takes 2 to 3 days to
clear. Meanwhile, your team can't
transact. Yeah, Bill solved that for its
half a million customers using an
embedded payment solution from JP
Morgan. With API based subleddgering,
they can manage millions of payments in
real time on any platform, all with one
bank account. Every bill customer gets a
unique virtual account number. So the
moment a payment is received, the credit
line is restored. The result is a way
simpler way to receive and route
payments at scale. And the actual
numbers are awesome. Payment posting
went from 2 to 3 days to seconds.
Inquiries dropped 83%. Even Bill's own
Treasury team reclaimed 20 hours a week
from manual reconciliation. For decades,
these were Fortune 500 only
capabilities. But Bill and JP Morgan
figured out how to deliver that same
infrastructure to the Fortune 5 million
while also improving Bill's internal
operations. You can read the full case
study as always at
jpmorggan.com/acquired.
And something else, if you want to join
us and JP Morgan in person, we'll be on
stage at the We Are Developers World
Congress in San Jose this September.
Click the link in the show notes to
learn more.
>> Okay, so David, how does this Oswald
catastrophe lead to Mickey Mouse? All
right. So, here's the story of Mickey
Mouse, as Walt would tell it. It's March
1928. He and Lillian are on the long
train ride back home to LA from New
York. He's struck by the bolt of
inspiration for a new cartoon scenario
about a pluckucky mouse named Mortimer
who is attempting to fly an airplane
just like his hero Charles Lindberg. And
this would go on to become the Mickey
cartoon Plane Crazy. So Walt shows his
sketches that he's making to Lillian and
Lillian says, "I like it, but Mortimer,
that's too a name. How about
Mickey?" And thus Mickey Mouse is born.
Now, the real story is more likely that
Walt and Lillian get back to LA and Walt
is like sweating. So he and Roy and the
couple other animators who stayed loyal
to them hole up and they start
brainstorming ideas for some kind of new
idea or new character that they can
create to replace Oswald and turn around
the studios fortunes.
>> And also when you see Mickey and you see
Oswald, it's not hard to imagine where
Mickey Mouse came from. It's like kind
of like shorten the ears, make them
circles, you know, they both kind of
have this white face and the black
outline.
>> I mean, it's really just the same brief
that created Oswald. It was like, "Hey,
take Felix and
>> do something like Felix." Except this
time it's
>> take Oswald and do something like Oswald
>> and make damn sure we own it.
>> Yes. Exactly. So, they land on the idea
of a mouse.
>> And didn't Walt claim that he sort of
like always had a fondness for mice cuz
there were mice that would like jump in
his trash can in Kansas City while he
was animating. And
>> sure, whatever. [laughter]
>> You know, it's all it's all just part of
the Walt myth.
>> Yes. And at least according to the Neil
Gabler book, most likely
is the one who first draws Mickey, not
Walt on the Train. But
>> either way,
definitely was the primary animator of
the first Mickey's for the whole first
series of Mickey's, including Steamboat
Willie. So, by the summer of 1928, we've
finished out the Oswald contract and
Walt and the small little merry crew
have gotten two Mickey shorts ready for
production. Plain crazy and the Gallop
and Gala show. And Walt takes them
around to distributors. You know, the
Walt Disney Studio is well known at this
point. This seems like it would be
promising new IP.
And none of the major distributors are
interested. They're like, "Yeah, I don't
know. This is Mickey. It's like Oswald,
but
>> without all the, you know, thousands or
hundreds of thousands of raving fans for
it." So,
>> Exactly. Exactly.
And then comes the Eureka Breakthrough
idea. One of the gang recalls that the
Jazz Singer, the famous first popular
talky, you know, movie with dialogue and
sound that had just come out the
previous fall, when they went to see it,
that there was a cartoon screened
alongside it. And Walt, when he hears
this, puts the two ideas together in his
mind of a cartoon and sound. And
supposedly he says, "That's it. That's
it. That's what we've got to do. Stop
all these silent pictures. Now, at this
point, people had made cartoons with
sound, but nobody had ever made a
cartoon with sound like the jazz singer
had sound.
>> Synchronized sound.
>> Synchronized. Yes. Exactly. Where what
was happening in real time in the
cartoon was then played in sound.
Exactly. Synchronized in the movie
theater.
>> Yeah. The concept before was there's
music that plays, but it's only loosely
attached. And this is to the frame and
to the beat of the music. Like if you
see Mickey on screen bop into something,
then you might hear a xylophone on the
exact same downbeat play a note.
>> Yeah. It's not just that like there's
some music accompanying this cartoon
that you're watching. It's that what is
happening in the cartoon feels like it
is producing the sound.
>> Yes. There's a great business model
lesson in this, which is with the first
two Mickey's flopping, if you just do
the same thing as an existing competitor
who already has distribution, brand,
customers, it's not enough. You need to
go do something leveraging a new piece
of technology or a new platform. You got
to come at it from an orthogonal way in
order to leaprog and make people pay
attention to you. Otherwise, you're just
a like smaller, worse, also ran.
>> Totally. And and that could be anything.
I mean, the only reason that the Oswalds
worked, even though they were a ripoff
of Felix was because they came built in
with the Universal distribution, but
yeah, Walt taking out the Mickey's
before bringing sound. Like, he's got
nothing to bring to the table here.
>> Yep.
>> So, Walt lines up access to the
Cinnaphhone sound recording system from
a character named Pat Powers, who had
actually helped create Universal, you
know, some number of decades earlier.
and then had gone on to become a sound
accolade and entrepreneur developing a
sound system for this new movie
technology. And so Walt and crew animate
a test sequence of a Mickey with sound
and they screen it for all their wives
and girlfriends and writes later of what
happened next when they screen the
synchronized sound Mickey for the first
time. I never saw such a reaction in an
audience in my life. The scheme worked
perfectly. The sound itself gave the
illusion of something emanating directly
from the screen. Walt kept crying, "This
is it. This is it. We've got it."
[laughter and gasps]
It turned out that sound was the
critical enabling technology for
animation to go beyond a novelty and
allow the characters that are on screen
to actually have personality that
audiences connect with.
>> So interesting. And it's not obvious
at first. It's obvious in retrospect,
but you can totally see how when Walt
had this insight and then they made the
investment cuz doing a test animation
and synchronizing the sound, like even
to show a little screener must have been
really hard at the time cuz none of the
tools existed. They sort of had to
invent the way to synchronize the
drawings with the music and the systems.
It's sort of a big bet even to try and
see if that creates personality.
>> Right. Right. And sound did the same
thing for liveaction movies, but it's
not that big a leap to have humans
talking. Like humans talk, you know,
sound just made it way better. Sound for
cartoons was this giant leap. These
characters, this art can now be actual
characters with personalities.
>> Yeah.
>> In a way that they couldn't before.
>> Non-obvious at the time, completely
obvious in retrospect.
>> Yep. So, they make Steamboat Willie as
the third Mickey, but the first with
synchronized sound,
>> which we're going to skip over the whole
headache nightmare of creating this
thing. But it was like Walt constantly
going back and forth to New York,
betting every last dollar that he had,
inventing all these new processes,
trying different ways to get an
orchestra synced to the sound.
>> Oh, yeah. They like animated a little
ball on the screen that would sync to
the orchestra as they were playing.
>> Yes. and he couldn't get the original
conductor of the orchestra to actually
use his method. The orchestra guy was
like, "Ah, trust me." And then it was
all out of sync with the screen. The the
net of it is it's a giant painful
operational struggle to get this thing
out, but my god does it hit.
>> Yes. Well, [laughter]
[gasps] you know, this is the nature of
the New York distributors. They get it
made. Walt takes it and shops it around
all the big folks in New York. And
they're so conservative. They're like,
"Well, this is cool, but um I don't know
how audiences are going to react to
this. We kind of want to see a test
first."
>> I don't want to be first in line.
>> Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. kind of like VCs
like [laughter]
so Walt decides that he's going to take
matters into his own hands and he goes
directly to the manager of the Colony
Theater in New York City and cuts a deal
for $1,000
to run Steamboat Willie before the
features that they're showing in the
Colony Theater. So going around
distributors just to get this in one
theater as a test.
>> Yep. And so Steamboat Willie premieres
in New York City on November 18th, 1928
before the film Gang War. Nobody really
remembers Gang War because Steamboat
Willie is a revolution. Critics love it.
Audiences love it.
>> Yeah. Isn't there some famous story of
people sort of standing up and
screaming, "We want Steamboat Willie
again instead of playing the the main
feature."
>> Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. But still,
you know, Disney now needs to find a
distributor. And now he's got the proof
point. [laughter]
These New York distributors, they're
still so conservative. They're like,
"Well, you had one hit. I don't know
that like we can really trust that this
isn't just a fad that the future sounds
are also going to be a hit and that you
can repeat the magic." And famously, one
distributor while Walt is meeting with
him here and he's trying to explain to
Walt why he's going to pass again on the
Mickey deal picks up a package of
Lifesavers candy. And he says to Walt,
"The public knows the Lifesavers brand.
They know what these are. They don't
know Walt Disney and they don't know
your mouse." [laughter]
>> I I can only imagine Walt sitting here
just seething.
>> Yeah. But this makes a huge impression
on him. I think this is an important
thing about Walt. He definitely has a
huge ego, right? But he is very willing
to learn even from pretty obnoxious
people. He's like, "You know what?
You're right."
>> Oh, I think he's motivated by learning.
He's motivated.
>> I think he's an engineer. I think he's
uh he loves picking things apart and
learning the way they work. I think he's
motivated to make the best art he can in
addition to making the best business he
can. So, if someone's going to offer him
>> a lesson,
>> a way to learn something. Yeah.
>> Yeah. He'll take it. he'll take it even
if he might be mad at the person. So he
writes about this moment later. From now
on, the audience was going to know if
they like the picture, they were going
to know Walt Disney's name. Ultimately,
what Walt does is he turns to Pat
Powers, his partner in the sound
technology, who had been one of the, you
know, original Universal executives, and
they cut a deal where Powers will be
Disney's direct distribution agent in
return for just 10% of the gross revenue
on the Mickey's, which seems like a
pretty good deal.
>> Yeah. And indeed, it was kind of a too
good to be true deal because Powers,
like all these New York guys,
was basically plotting to do the exact
same thing as Mintz to Disney. He wanted
to start working with Walt, give him a
sweetheart deal, and then lure away the
animation talent because Powers,
remember, has the sound technology that
he's given to Walt. So he's thinking, if
I get the animators, right,
>> what do we need Walt for?
>> So this explains the sweetheart deal on
distribution because that wasn't the
real prize he was after.
>> And
just a year later in 1930, Powers does
the unthinkable.
He convinces Eyeworks to quit and leave
Disney. He says, "U, we're going to get
you set up with your own studio. You're
going to work with me. we were to create
new characters. It's the exact same
thing that Mintz did to Disney last
time.
>> Absolutely brutal.
>> Except it plays out the exact opposite
way.
>> Cuz Walt's learned his lesson.
>> Walt has learned his lesson. By the time
this happens, over a dozen Mickey shorts
with sound have come out. Every single
one of them branded prominently up front
and at the end a Walt Disney comic. And
they had become huge hits. So even
though Power Steals Eye Works away,
nobody cares. Everybody still wants the
Mickey's. Everybody still wants Walt
Disney Comics. Disney has made himself
the lifesavers of animation.
>> Disney first switches to Columbia for
distribution and then to United Artists.
And audiences just keep loving Mickey.
In fact, they love him so much that it
leads to the discovery of a whole new
business model for Disney and the
company, the intellectual property
flywheel. And it starts with the Mickey
Mouse Club. This is wild. I had no idea
about the origins of the Mickey Mouse
Club.
>> Basically discovered by Disney by
accident, right?
>> Totally by accident. [laughter]
So, in the summer of 1929,
just a few months after Steamboat Willie
and the first sort of nationally
distributed Mickeyy's, the manager of
the Fox Dome Theater in Ocean Park,
California, contacts Walt with an idea.
Why don't we partner to start a Mickey
Mouse club for kids? I've got like a
thousand kids who keep showing up here
at the theater every weekend and all
they want to do is watch the Mickey's
again and again and again. I think we
should capitalize on this. We can create
a club like a kids club and we can
charge parents a membership fee. The
kids will love it. The parents will get
them out of the house every weekend.
It'll be great. and we can pilot it here
at the Foxdome Theater and then if it
works I think we can franchise this
nationally. And so this is exactly what
Walt and this theater manager do. The
way it works when they take it national
is that theaters would buy a quote
Mickey Mouse Club charter from the
company from the Walt Disney Studio.
>> It's like a franchise.
>> Yeah, like a franchise right
>> for $25. And then as part of the club,
the kids and their parents would gain
the right to buy exclusive Mickey
merchandise.
>> I mean, it's kind of amazing, right? Pay
to become a member of a club to dedicate
yourself to fandom. So, you have the
right to buy more things.
>> The right to buy more things. Yes. So,
like hats, buttons, banners, etc. And
all of this revenue is getting split
back with Disney. the $25 club charter
and then all the merchandise revenue.
>> Pretty quickly, there are 800
Mickey Mouse clubs across the country
with more than 1 million total members.
That is more members than the Boy and
Girl Scouts of America combined at this
point in time.
>> That's insane scale and insane speed of
adoption pre- internet.
>> Right. Right. pre- internet, pre-cable,
pre-bro TV, the ability to get a million
Americans doing something within a few
years is uh like how did that even work?
I mean, I'm trying to think how word
could even spread that quickly. I guess
through theaters, Disney's distributors
>> to the theaters.
>> Well, this is like a no-brainer
proposition for a movie theater
operator. You're going to take your
Saturday or Sunday afternoons, which are
probably reserved mostly for kids
anyway. all your matinea showings,
right? You're going to convert it into a
Mickey Mouse club.
>> Kids are going to love it. They're going
to buy a bunch of stuff [laughter]
that you otherwise wouldn't have the
opportunity to sell to them. Parents are
going to love it because they get rid of
the kids. And then for Disney, they're
just getting this turbocharged
distribution and brand recognition of
Disney the company and Mickey Mouse the
character.
>> Yeah, it's amazing. Okay, so they take
the learnings from the Mickey Mouse
Club, right? And they kind of lean into
Mickey in a in a big way at the
corporate level.
>> Totally. So just a few months after the
Mickey Mouse Club kicks off in January
1930, they launch a daily Mickey comic
strip with King Features Syndicate in
newspapers around the country. It gets
published daily in 60 US newspapers and
then also internationally in 20 more
countries around the world. So Disney is
getting paid
to produce a Mickey comic strip, which
only cost them the salary of the one
animator that they have making it every
day, a 24-year-old named Floyd
Gotfredson, who would do it every day
for 45 years.
>> Wow. Wild. So, not only are they getting
revenue for this, they're getting free
daily advertising and IP exposure to
probably a 100 million plus people
through this newspaper comic
distribution every single day.
>> And even if they weren't getting paid
for it, the marketing on that so that
people go see Mickey films.
>> Exactly. Yeah. It never becomes a huge
revenue or profit driver for them, but
like that free daily marketing in most
major newspapers around the country is
incredible.
>> Yep. Interesting to know Oswald actually
was on a candy bar back in the day, but
when Walt, who at the time saw he owned
Oswald, had the opportunity to monetize
it, he was like, I I didn't even
consider it. It it doesn't need to be an
additional revenue stream. It's just
really good for me if Oswald is on the
candy bar. Right. So, that's sort of uh
they're getting the seeds of like, okay,
we're making some money on the comics,
but it it it really is like a massive
marketing engine.
>> Well, uh you're teeing up the big one
here, which is merch and consumer
products.
>> Yep. So pretty quickly after Steamboat
Willie, Walt is walking the street in
New York and a man comes up to him, like
comes up to Walt Disney on the street
and offers Walt $300
to license the Mickey character to put
it on a series of children's writing
workbooks that he's producing there in
New York. And this is like really early
days. Mickey's just starting to work.
The studio still needs money. So Walt's
like, "Uh, sure. Yeah, I'll take 300
bucks. Why not?"
>> And 300 bucks in 1929, it's a lot of
money. I mean, this is the beginning of
the Great Depression.
>> Yes. Yes. Mi Mickey takes off during the
depression. In fact, he sort of becomes
like a national champion. It's part of
his success that people view Plucky
Mickey's success as a mouse, as the
underdog, as like something that
>> Americans can identify with through the
depression.
>> And life is hard. I mean, having a sort
of way to disassociate a little bit and
then just enjoy a like funloving,
problemfree cartoon. I don't think
people know this. Mickey's role in these
early comics is exactly what you're
saying, the underdog. He's getting
himself into these tricky situations by
someone that seems bigger and stronger
and he's able to figure it out and
emerge. It's the American spirit.
>> Yep. Yep. Yep. So, back to the writing
tablets,
they take off and do huge, huge sales.
Disney doesn't even know how much sales
because all they have is 300 a handshake
from this guy. [laughter]
So, Walt and Roy figure, "All right, we
need to get smarter about merch." So,
they contact an adman in Kansas City
that Walt admired named K. Cayman who
had owned an advertising firm and they
agree to do a deal where Kay becomes the
exclusive
commercial products agent for all Disney
merchandise licensing beginning in 1933.
And the deal they do is that Disney
would get 60% of the first $100,000 in
royalties that Kay is able to generate
from licensing Disney brands and
mascots. And then after the first 100k,
they would split every dollar of
licensing revenue 5050
>> and there would be a lot of dollars
after the first 100k. This is a huge
moment. I mean there there is a real
case to be made that besides Walt and
Roy and and of I works too, but at least
on the business side besides Walt and
Roy K. Cayman was the third most
important person in the first, you know,
half century of Disney.
>> All right. So, make your case. What what
what goes on to happen here?
>> So, within 6 months, Kay takes Disney
merchandising from this hodgepodge of
random licenses of guys that Walt met on
the street
>> and many of which were a lot more than
$300.
>> Yes. Yes. to a real professional
operation
doing $6 million
of gross merchandise sales within six
months. That then grows over the next
two years to $70 million annually of
gross merchandise sales all around the
globe from over 40 separate super high
quality consumer product partners. So
the most successful and famous example
of this is the deal that Kay does in
1933 right after he takes over with the
Ingresol Watt company. This is crazy
that within just a few years they can be
at a $70 million level in 1935
of merch. I mean, there's so much pent
up demand to buy Mickey Mouse stuff that
you can sort of explode out of the gate.
I don't even really understand how Kay
lined up 40 merchants and got all this
stuff manufactured and distributed in
such a short period of time.
>> Well, I think part of it though is that
he's like a real professional and well
respected in the industry with contacts.
But yeah, to your point, Ben, there's
just so much demand for Disney merch. So
the $70 million is a like gross sales to
the end consumer number. So most deals
that K would do would be for 5%
royalties on the wholesale price of the
goods and the $70 million was retail. So
if you assume 100% retail markup, that's
$35 million in wholesale revenue. Y
>> Disney and Cayman are splitting 5% of
that number between them, but even that
is $1.75 million
split 50/50 between Disney and K. This
is like an astronomical number and it is
a way way bigger and better business
than the cartoons themselves at this
point in time.
>> It's funny. I I found the comment on the
Disney Family Museum site that by the
late 1930s, royalty income from
merchandise had exceeded revenue from
film rentals. But
>> it wasn't even by the late 1930s, it was
1934.
>> It was quick and it was by a lot.
>> Yes. Yes. So, just to illustrate the
difference, the distribution deal that
Disney does with United Artists for the
Mickey films and for the Silly
Symphonies, which is the second cartoon
series that Disney starts in the 30s,
Disney gets an advance of $15,000 per
film, but Walt is always investing
ever more and more in the production of
the cartoons themselves.
By this point in time in the mid30s,
he's investing like $30,000 plus per
cartoon. He's only getting a $15,000
advance. So, it's not even guaranteed
that each individual cartoon would be
profitable. Usually, they were, but they
would have to earn out on the back end.
Compare that to, you know, half of
basically $2 million in pure margin,
almost pure margin revenue coming in
from K every year. It doesn't even
matter that Walt is investing everything
back into the cartoons. He's got this
money spiggot coming in.
>> Right. So, summarizing that, films are
tens or low hundreds of thousands of
dollars of profit coming in and the
merch is on the order of a million
dollars.
>> Yep. And film profitability is highly
dependent on a film by film basis. It's
got to play out in theaters, etc., etc.
>> All right. So, I cut you off on the
Ingresol watch company.
>> Yeah. Just as one example of like the
deals that Kay is doing, in 1933, right
after he takes over, he does a deal with
the Ingresol Watch Company to
manufacture the famous Mickey Mouse
watch. That watch would sell 2 and a
half million units [laughter] over the
next two years. The Ingresol Watch
Company was about to go bankrupt during
the depression. It saves the company.
Hm. And wasn't it the most popular watch
in America?
>> I think that's right. At least for some
point in time during the 30s.
>> It's fascinating. And of course, the the
modern Apple Watch Mickey watch face is
a reference to this cuz he's using his
arms to point to the the times on that
original Incorolaw watch.
>> This is a whole different shape of a
business than has ever existed before. I
mean, it's funny. We started the episode
comparing Disney to other Hollywood
studios, but this is not a Hollywood
studio. They're not shooting liveaction
films. They're making these cartoons.
The rest of the industry is is kind of
doing slap dash ones. They're doing like
really high production value sound
synchronized cartoons and they're
actually making more of their money from
merchandise. They've got these Mickey
Mouse clubs.
>> Like this is a new thing that no one
else is doing.
>> Yep. This is the birth of the Disney
flywheel and nobody else has it. So, is
this a point where David I could make my
pedantic aside that I've been telling
you about?
>> Yes. Yes. Yes. Go for it. [laughter]
>> We had a great email from a listener a
couple months ago about how flywheel,
this term that everybody uses in
business is actually completely the
wrong term for what you're want to
describe.
>> So, Disney is famous for this concept,
as is Amazon, and it inspired a zillion
other founders to try and articulate
their own flywheel and and draw it out.
But hilariously, David, as you say, it
is a misnomer. It describes the wrong
physics phenomenon. People are trying to
describe a system that has a positive
feedback loop where inputs into one
element of the system are amplified and
add energy to other parts of the system.
But that is not actually what a flywheel
is. A flywheel is a primitive battery.
It it is a way to store energy to be
deployed later.
>> Yeah. It's like a version of the same
mechanism that a spring serves in a
mechanical watch.
>> Right. Exactly. But in reality, there's
not really a better shorthand for system
of integrated components that creates
positive feedback loops. So uh we will
continue alas to use the phrase
flywheel. But uh the important thing
here is that Walt really did sort of
either discover or invent this business
model of the intellectual property
flywheel that we see replicated all over
the place today. I mean, I think it
really revealed itself to him and Roy in
these early years of Mickey. And it's
probably worth taking a moment to talk
about why this works so well. So the
most important thing, and I don't think
this was premeditated in any way by
Walt, but it was just something he
innately cared so deeply about, is to
make the highest quality,
genuinely most compelling new IP as
possible that audiences can build a deep
relationship with. This is like what
Walt was building to and too through all
of his early years in animation. all the
technical innovations, every step was
getting to a character that audiences
can fall in love with.
>> Yeah.
>> Now, critically for Disney, and again, I
think completely accidentally discovered
by Walt, the IP that works best for
Flywheel Dynamics almost has to be
animated, i.e. not live action. Because
with live action characters, the
characters are too bound up in the
actors that play them. And that creates
all sorts of problems. Like one,
especially today, it makes your
economics as a studio just like way
worse because you got to pay the stars
so much,
>> right? There's wholesale transfer
pricing. A huge amount of the margin you
could get ends up getting paid out to
effectively your partner in creating the
character, the actual actor.
>> Whereas Mickey works for free. No, like
you you got to like pay the animators
and they get paid very well to animate
them. It's
>> that's on the value capture side, but on
the value creation side, which I think
is the more important thing, Mickey is
always available to work.
>> Yes. Yes.
>> And Mickey doesn't age.
>> Yes. Exactly. You can create a eternal
character through animation in a way
that you just can't when you're using
real people. I mean, Star Wars, as great
as Star Wars is, and we'll talk about it
later in the episode, is going to have a
problem when Mark Hamill and Harrison
Ford die. I mean, I guess unless AI gets
really good.
>> And live action is sort of dated to a
time and place in a way that cartoons
can sort of transcend. Like Mickey can
always exist in the present
>> in a way that we're going to talk about
Davy Crockett later, but at some point
it became completely uninteresting to
watch Davy Crockett. Even though he was
like a complete heartthrob obsession
that was great IP for the moment, it
just wasn't as durable.
>> Yeah. Live action IP with very few
exceptions tends not to have the staying
power over decades and generations that
animation does.
>> Yeah. few exceptions being like James
Bond, but god have they tried to do all
sorts of crazy stuff in order to let
that IP keep living. I mean, like
there's been six, seven James Bonds, you
know, and they have to keep rebooting
the story over and over.
>> Exactly. Okay, so that's step one.
Genuinely great IP that audiences fall
in love with has to be at the core.
Then step two, you need to maximize the
distribution for that IP as wide and as
far as possible in its primary delivery
vehicle. So like Mickey in those films,
get those films into as many theaters as
possible to just completely saturate the
world. It's sort of a scale economies
thing. If you're going to invest a whole
bunch in making it the very best you
can, then you need to distribute it
everywhere in order to maximize the
impact from that huge upfront
investment.
>> Which of course applies to any film and
any IP. But for Disney in the flywheel
business model, they're willing to make
every sacrifice possible to maximize
distribution because they know that
they're going to monetize through the
flywheel in a way that nobody else can.
If they saturate all of America or all
of the English speaking world with a
character, then that character, that
movie can become a shared cultural
memory.
>> So then that leads right into the third
thing, which is the ancillary nodes of
the flywheel itself. Once you've got the
great IP, once you've distributed it as
widely as possible, then you want to get
that IP into as many other arenas as
possible. And this is exactly what
Disney was doing,
>> right? Other mediums,
>> merch, clubs, comics, books, magazines.
The beauty here and the discovery that
Disney makes is that when you put the IP
into these other ancillary nodes, it
doesn't cannibalize the core IP. Like
you're not going to oversaturate Mickey
by having a Mickey comic strip and daily
exposure in the way that if you released
a new Mickey film every single day,
people would get tired of Mickey's.
>> If you structure the nodes of the
flywheel, right,
>> the additional exposure reinforces the
core IP. That's really interesting. So
you do need some scarcity of the
character in its main medium where you
need like a really high quality bar and
not oversaturate there but in your
secondary mediums then you can cover the
earth and be like everywhere all the
time.
>> Exactly. And so then if you flash
forward to today and like the problems
that Hollywood and most other studios
have and Disney too, especially with
Marvel, if you come out with sequels all
the time at this like everinccreasing
cadence of the core IP and the core
delivery vehicle, people get tired of
it.
>> That's super interesting.
>> But the flywheel lets you get that
constant exposure without oversaturating
the core IP. It's like absolutely
brilliant. Not to mention releasing
films is actually not and never has been
a great business model. It's just not
that high margin. It's not that
repeatable or predictable in its
success. So you kind of
>> you have to invest years ahead in
production before you get any payout.
>> Right. Right. That and any studio that
is purely a studio is in for a rough go.
But if you're you're trying to basically
create this like durable platform of
profit with all of these ancillary
businesses, then you can focus on
scarcity, quality, innovation in the
kind of primary medium.
>> Yep. Because you know you're going to
drive revenue basically in perpetuity
out of it through the flywheel.
>> Do you think I'm thinking about this as
it pertains to acquired, we're so
obsessed with quality and just being in
one medium. Do you think that it is okay
to lower the quality bar outside the
primary medium? Like, can Disney throw
Mickey Mouse on all sorts of crap
without diminishing the brand of Mickey
Mouse as long as the primary medium of
film stays really high quality.
>> Basically, I think the answer to that is
yes.
>> Huh.
>> At least for Disney. I don't know about
acquired. [laughter]
>> Yeah. I don't I don't know if it applies
to premium brands or luxury brands, but
>> you got to be really careful about what
the mediums are. This is why comics is
so perfect for the flywheel because
people are used to consuming a daily bit
of content in a comic strip and they
don't have expectations that it's going
to be, you know, a great masterpiece
like Snow White or Steamboat Willie each
time.
>> Right. And when you read the noncanon
Star Wars books,
>> Yes. it doesn't detract from the canon.
>> That's exactly right. But it does deepen
your fandom.
>> Yes. Exactly. Exactly.
>> Huh. So all of this as Walt starts to
understand the business model power of
what they've created leads him right to
the natural conclusion that Disney
should basically always invest as much
time and money as possible in the
creation of new core IP. And Walt is
starting to get a crazy idea of how he
might be able to do that, which is to
create Hollywood's first fulllength
animated
feature film,
Snow White. Yeah. And David, you put it
in such a capitalist way there that it's
it's to maximize the amount of of
dollars that you sink into making the
quality so that it federates onto this
flywheel.
I'm sure there was an element of that.
There also is an artist with Walt where
he's been creating these cartoons. He's
starting to like really identify with
the artistic community, with the fine
artists of the time, build a lot of
those relationships. and he wants to
create something that is sort of seen as
not only a technology breakthrough but
like an art breakthrough. Can can he
create a masterpiece in this new medium
>> and can he play with your emotions? I
mean, we we know that cartoon characters
in a slapstick way can make you laugh,
but there is this like total open
question in the world of can you create
animation so realistic and characters so
compelling that you can make audiences
cry.
>> Yeah,
>> that's the other side of the ludicrously
capitalist big investment into Snow
White.
>> You're totally right. I'm looking at it
through like a business model,
capitalist lens. And uh I I don't think
Walt was thinking about it that way
specifically.
>> He did want to build the most successful
company that he possibly could that
could take bigger and bigger swings.
>> Yes.
>> So listeners, before we tell you the
story of Snow White and how it came to
be, now is a great time to tell you
about one of our favorite companies,
Versel. So building software in the
agentic AI era demands a completely
different kind of infrastructure. So
that's exactly what Verscell has been
building. Their tools in their agent
stack have been huge for companies like
Notion, Brex, and Neon for shipping
agents to production. And they just made
some really big announcements on stage
at their annual conference called Ship,
which uh David and I actually spoke at
last year. Yes. One of the biggest
announcements is Eve, Verscell's open-
source agent framework.
>> Yep. Eve is the glue that ties their
agent stack together. Building an
enterprisegrade agent used to take
weeks. With Eve, it now just takes
minutes. Think of it as like the next.js
for agents, opinionated, open- source,
and it runs everywhere. And Verscell
uses it for their whole business. Their
data agent gives the whole company
ondemand analytics scoped to each
person's permissions. their sales agent
nearly doubled pipeline coverage and
their autonomous AI sales rep platforms
is in the top 10% of their human reps uh
you know for only a few thousand dollars
a year. They also rolled out new support
for enterprise apps and agents because
here's what every executive is realizing
once everyone can build an agent. The
hard part is knowing who can access what
and what every agent is actually doing.
Wouldn't it be nice to run your agents
and apps inside your own cloud so that
everything you build stays within your
own security boundary? Verscell does
exactly that.
>> Versel's your one-stop shop for the
Agentic era. Tools, frameworks,
infrastructure, all engineered to work
together and built for enterprises. And
one last cool thing, their ship
conference is hitting more cities
worldwide. So you can find out more at
verscell.com/acquired.
That's verel.com/acquired.
And just tell them that Ben and David
sent you. All right. So, David, before
we tell the story of how Snow White came
to be, we got to tell the nickname of
Snow White, the project that was going
around Hollywood. Do you know what that
was?
>> Disney's folly.
>> Yes. Yes. I think it was maybe Walt's
folly, but either way, it's the exact
same thing that people said about Trip
Hawkins when he was working on Madden,
about Jack Bogle with Bogle's folly with
creating the Vanguard index funds. We
got to like start a a folly tracker here
on tracker. [laughter]
>> But yeah, I mean even for Walt Disney,
as successful as he and the studio have
become, the idea of a featurelength
animated film was crazy in 1930s
Hollywood.
>> And it had never been tried before.
>> I mean, Roy tried to persuade him not to
do it. He argues that it's going to
bankrupt the studio.
>> Yeah, this is a multi-million dollar
undertaking. When David, as you were
talking about before, the shorts were
like $15,000, $30,000 undertakings.
>> Yep. Walt would say later about Snow
White, we had decided there was only one
way we could successfully do Snow White,
and that was to go for broke, shoot the
works. There would be no compromise on
money, talent, or time. We did not know
whether the public would go for a
cartoon feature, but we were darn sure
that audiences would not buy a bad
cartoon feature. [laughter]
So good. It had to be a masterpiece or
the whole thing was going to fall apart.
>> Okay. So, why was this so expensive? Why
was such a giant undertaking to create a
animated feature fulllength film?
Listeners, I thought it'd be fun on this
episode to dive into the process and
give everyone a little primer on what
are the steps to create an animated
film.
>> Yes, it's a true technical wonder and
you and I got to actually do it when we
went to visit the Disney studio. It was
so fun.
>> Well, one part of one frame of
[laughter] it. Yes.
>> One tiny part of inking and painting.
>> Listeners, we'll include some behind the
scenes ink and paint photos of David and
I in the email. So, let's start with the
goal. The goal is to create the illusion
of motion with a series of still frames.
Like a ton of still frames, 24 still
frames per second.
So that requires a lot of clever tricks
to make it economically possible, to
make it consistent, and to make it
enjoyable. And if you really do your
job, to make it emotional for the
viewer.
>> And to be clear, liveaction film is the
same thing. It's an illusion, but as we
talked about earlier, it doesn't cost
anything to animate the humans,
>> and you get physics for free. So
believability comes for free. You don't
have to do clever things like figure out
how do things stretch and squish when
someone bounces on the ground. It all
just sort of happens because you're
shooting it in the real world. Yep.
>> So, where does it all start? It starts
with a good story. So, there's something
called the story department that kicks
off the process with little sketches
that are sort of pinned to corkboards.
And so, these story meetings are great.
You have people acting out alongside the
drawings to illustrate their idea, how
the characters move and interact and
talk. And Walt was famously amazing to
watch when he did this acting. So this
then gets put into a story reel of
static sketches just kind of
illustrating the main flow of the story.
At this point, it is super easy to edit,
reorder, change dialogue, anything.
>> I see [snorts] where you're going with
this. at this point.
>> at this point. So then the sound
department gets involved and that's both
music and voice. So first you'll have
oftentimes a temp voice over so the
animators have something to animate to
if you don't have the real actors laying
down the vocal track yet. You also have
the music scored and recorded at this
phase. And the way that animation and
sound are synced at this point is
through something called bar sheets or
exposure sheets where the entire film,
this is going to sound insane, is broken
down by frame, by syllable of dialogue
and by beat of the music and these are
mapped together. So this way the
animator can do their drawings exactly
to the music and dialogue. Now you can
kind of understand the insanity of what
Steamboat Willie was trying to do and
why that was so difficult. The the
Disney studio kind of had to invent this
process.
>> Yeah. And that was what 7 8 minutes
long.
>> Yes. Meanwhile, you have the layout
department who is doing the staging, the
camera framing, the composition of these
shots, the lighting for every scene.
Now, when I say things like staging,
there's there's no stage. camera
framing. There is a camera, but that's
not even the camera this is referring
to. This is where the synthetic camera
is aiming in the synthetic action
composition, lighting. This isn't like
lighting the way you think of lighting.
This is this very abstract art of
imagining what it would look like if
these characters were real and there
were real lights and figuring out how to
draw that scene.
Then this gets forked into two parallel
processes where background painters are
doing their work on these gorgeous
watercolors on paper and oil paintings
on these super wide panes of glass to
allow for the panning across the scene.
Whenever you go into the Disney
archives, you can see these I don't know
4 foot wide by something like 8 in tall
backgrounds because the camera has to
pan around as the characters move around
against the background. And then the
other side of the fork is the animators
who are doing their work on the
characters themselves.
>> Yep. Yeah. The backgrounds are just
beautiful when you see them in person.
That was my favorite part about the
archive to get to see the backgrounds of
Snow White or Cinderella or the other
great Disney classics. You just look at
them and think, "Oh my god, these are
right up there with Rembrandt or
Picassos or Da. They should be in a
museum."
>> And they are basically in a museum.
Disney has 11 rooms in the animation
research library which are temperature
controlled and humidity controlled. And
they've got all these UV filters all
over everything. And there's these
drawers and drawers and drawers inside.
It almost looks like data centers where
they have all of these old background
paintings and all the drawings we're
about to talk about.
>> Yep. So, the animation department then
develops what's called a character model
sheet that shows the character from
several different angles and positions
they're likely to be in throughout the
film. This is distributed to each
animator who works on that character cuz
often and by necessity there are
multiple since that character is going
to exist on film for you know 80 90 100
minutes. There's a lot of drawing to do.
Then there's the model department who
makes something called a mckette. The
animators who are drawing a character
hundreds and hundreds or thousands of
times or tens of thousands of times need
a consistent physical reference that
they can hold and rotate and examined
under a lamp. So these are, you know, 8
in tall versions of the characters that
are
>> little statues,
>> right? They're perfect so that you can
kind of say how would they look from
that angle? How would they look if I
stood 8 ft away? Then you have animation
itself. So, it starts with sketching on
paper with a pencil or with charcoal,
and they're literally sketching one
frame at a time. And they are flipping
pages on their pad of paper back and
forth, back and forth, over and over
again to get a feel for how the emotion
of the drawing is coming through frame
to frame. Does this character move like
I think they should move? Are they
consistent in their motion? Is their
clothing sort of twirling the right way
when they turn left? It's an insane art.
>> Are their mouths speaking correctly?
Yeah.
>> Right. As the character drifts closer to
the synthetic camera, are they getting
big in a way that feels consistent with
the laws of physics? My mind is so blown
by the skill and talent of these people.
So 24 frames per second means 12 to 14
drawings per second. So think a,000ish
per minute. That's around 80,000 in a
featurelength film of this era. And of
course that's if there's only one
character doing one thing on one layer.
>> Yes. There's usually about what? Double
that.
>> Triple quadruple. Yeah.
>> So there's two ways that this can
happen. One is the most clean and
obvious one straight ahead which is
where an animator draws every frame in
order. Or there's something called
inbetweeners where lead animators draw
the key frames with the essential poses
or major character movements and then
the assistants or the inbetweeners go to
the drawings and they sort of bridge
between those frames and the goal of
doing this is to make the most efficient
use of the skilled artists time on the
film. Now, over a time, a division of
labor started to emerge where, which
kind of makes sense, a super skilled
animator would do work kind of fast and
loose with sketches that had little
extra lines hanging off everywhere.
There'd be like revisions on top of
their original drawing without actually
cleaning up the the the mistakes
underneath. And then it was handed over
to a cleanup artist to trace their
drawings with a single line versus the
hairy mess to kind of get it ready for
the next stage. But again preserving the
same correct emotion, flow, bounciness,
shape, form of the lines. Both the
inbetweeners and the cleanup artists
were kind of a result of the
industrialization of the animation
process versus the early days in the
early Mickey ones of a kind of a single
artist animating the entire thing.
>> Yeah. By this point, as they're heading
into Snow White, this had become a real
scale production process. I mean, it
wasn't quite like an assembly line. This
is still art here, but it's a lot closer
to Henry Ford than it is to Picasso in
his studio,
>> right? At least you do need to sort of
synchronize and coordinate teams and
make the highest use of the most
valuable scarce resources, stuff like
that.
>> Yep.
>> So, then there's ink and paint. So,
let's talk about inkers. Back in 1914,
Earl Herd had invented a concept known
as cell animation, CEL, where you would
draw with ink on the front of a piece of
transparent plastic or cell in the
business, short for celluloid. And that
way you could keep redrawing just the
character in each frame and the
background could stay static. That
essentially made animation possible at
all. In 1914, you could imagine if you
had to just redraw every line on every
frame every time. One, it would look
crappy because things would sort of
wiggle all over the place when the film
was actually playing, but two, it just
was economically infeasible to draw
every line every time.
>> Yeah. It was not scalable. So it had
evolved since then where there were now
armies of people who were almost
exclusively women at this point in
history who would literally duplicate
every line that the animators drew on
paper with pencil and they would trace
over their entire drawing with ink on
cell every single frame.
>> Yes. So, what you would see on screen is
in a film is actually not the direct
work of an animator, but it's the
painstaking work of an inker who traces
over the animator's line on the
transparent celluloid instead of on
paper.
>> Yep. And then the inkers would flip the
cells over and pass them off to the
painters.
>> Yes. So, this is how they get color in.
You want your outlines on the front so
it it masks any colors that sort of
overflow out of, you know, the dwarf's
shirt or Mickey's shoe. And then on the
back, that's where you do your painting.
You put all the colors on. Uh, and
David, what you were referring to is is
you and I uh did did some painting on a
pre-inked Mickey Mouse.
>> Hey, we did a little bit of inking on
the first.
>> We did a little bit inking. Ink
[laughter] inking is hard.
>> Inking is harder than painting.
>> Painting is forgiving.
>> Yeah. But Disney has this room with
thousands and thousands of colors of
handmade on-site paint that is a
production facility for paint color and
applying that color to animation cells.
>> It used to be called the Rainbow Room.
Those colors, that paint went into Snow
White, Cinderella, Peter Pan, Alice in
Wonderland.
>> Thousands of people each making
thousands of drawings. It multiplies
fast. So then you've got your special
effects layer. So like Tinkerbell's
wings use effectively spray paint like a
a little paint gun so it can be
partially translucent or the dwarf's
glasses or sparkles or another thing in
special effects is like water effects.
What if you want to make it look like
there's a little bit of a ripple in the
water or some depth of field on some
leaves that are closer to the camera? So
before any of this inking and painting
which was super expensive and
timeconuming they would do something
called a pencil test where they would
take the pencil sketch drawings on paper
and put them all through the camera so
the animators in Walt could look at the
rough action and see if it felt right.
See if it had the right physics
correctly represented each character's
tone and emotions. It's almost like a
higher fidelity prototype than the one
that we first talked about that came out
of the story meetings. It was a way to
catch things that weren't working before
you got all the way to full fidelity.
Then camera. This is like the coolest
part of the whole thing.
>> The multiplane. This is incredible.
>> So Disney and Bill Gity took the idea of
a multiplane camera that had existed
before Disney. Eyeworks actually built
one of the first advanced multiplane
cameras back in 33 while he was away
from the company doing his own thing
using parts from an old Chevy.
>> Yes. [laughter] Yes. And then Walt
rehired I works later to come back and
lead within Disney.
>> Yep. Like process improvement for how we
do animation. So Disney created the
first one to be used in a feature film.
It is unbelievably cool. It has an
entire massive room to itself. There's a
team of operators to make it work. You
had to climb a ladder to get all the way
to the top. So here's how it works.
There's a stillframe photo camera
mounted on the top of this thing pointed
straight down.
>> Yeah, it's like what? Probably 15t tall.
>> That feels high. 10, 12, yeah, but
something like that. There were up to
seven planes that you could use. So,
you've got these horizontal planes
between the floor and where the camera
is mounted, you know, up 12 ft in the
air. Typically, with the character on
the celluloid almost all the way close
to the top of the camera, unless you had
like special effects or some foreground
obscuring the character or something
like that. And then all the elements of
the background at various sort of
different depths away from the character
are painted on panes of glass and paper
below that. And you'd want the
background broken out onto multiple
panes. So you could do things like a
parallax effect if they were sort of
panning by. Or if you wanted to do like
an establishing shot to zoom in on a
subject from far away, you could
progressively in every single photo that
the camera took every frame bring the
panes of glass closer to the camera at
different calculated rates. So the
distance between the planes could be
adjusted to really sell the the
animation. David, you and I saw one of
these in the corporate archives in
Burbank. You've actually seen two of the
three that exist, right?
>> Yes. Yes. One of the other ones is at
the Walt Disney Family Museum in the
Prescidio in San Francisco, which is an
incredible museum and resource that
informed a lot of this episode.
>> Worth calling out, this is a photo
camera, not a movie camera. So, it would
just photograph one frame at a time, and
then all the technicians would adjust
all the knobs and layer placements for
the next frame. So when you look at the
level of invention required to create a
multiplane camera and operate it, you
kind of start to understand how these
guys in the animation department could
evolve into Imagineers.
>> Yes.
>> Like this. There's a lot of physicality
involved in animation that I don't think
I really understood until diving into
this process.
>> You know what? What's happening at
Disney isn't just the intersection of
art and commerce. It's the three-way
intersection of art and commerce and
engineering. and always has been.
>> Yep, I think that's right. All right, so
that's the animation process. That is
why this is such a giant difficult
undertaking to create something like
Snow White.
>> Absolutely enormous undertaking. So when
all is said and done, it takes $1.5
million
of investment over three years of studio
work to create Snow White. Remember,
this is at the same time as Disney is
making short cartoons for like, I don't
know, 20 $30,000. And even that is way
above what anybody else in the industry
is spending. This is $35 million
inflation adjusted. And yeah, movies are
like $300 million budgets today, but
imagine nobody's doing that. And you
have the first idea to create an
animated movie and you're like, I'd like
$35 million of budget to make that,
>> right? When Roy said that he was worried
it was going to bankrupt the studio,
like Roy was being the rational one
here. [laughter]
[gasps]
>> They have to take out a whole series of
loans from Bank of America in order to
finance production. Even with all the
money they have coming in from the
Flywheel and Consumer Products and the
Mickey Mouse Club, etc. Ben, as you were
saying, all the art and the work that
goes into it, 2 million sketches and
250,000
finished drawings and cells go into Snow
White. This is at a scale so beyond what
anybody else in the entire entertainment
industry is doing. Gabler in his book
uses the analogy of it was like a gothic
cathedral in animation. That is like the
only kind of analogy that makes sense
here. They staffed up to 750 studio
artists and did three years of non-stop
work on production.
>> Yeah. Incredible.
>> They actually went so far as to hire
actors to play each of the roles and put
them in full costumes so they could film
them for inspiration just so the
animators could watch and see the
natural motion so it would look as
lifelike as possible to sell the
illusion. This is so much different than
animating a cartoon mouse. the massive
investment in all the little details
just to make the viewer buy in
emotionally to these characters. My
favorite one of these little tidbits is
that the actress who played Snow White
even wore a hair helmet since the drawn
character's proportions were actually
pretty different than a real life woman
so that they could kind of get a sense
from watching the test footage how the
character moved around in the world.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you made the point a
few minutes ago, Ben, that Walt Disney
wasn't doing this because he was some
capitalist. I think he really did
recognize the incredible
flywheel business model that he had sort
of accidentally created and leaned into
it. But like that's not going to
motivate him to film a whole liveaction
version in costume just so that they can
make sure they get the spirit right.
Like this is art that they're creating.
>> An obsession with quality.
>> Absolutely. So, the movie finally
premieres in Hollywood on December 21st,
1937.
And I mean, it's one of the greatest
films ever made. The Academy Awards
creates a special Oscar for Snow White,
a special award.
>> Yeah, cuz they didn't think it could be
eligible for best picture. This movie, I
don't want to bury the lead. It was the
highest grossing film, not only of the
year, but ever. It did $8 million of
rental revenue on a $1.5 million
production cost. And like the category
was so new and different that they were
like, uh, instead of being eligible to
be nominated for best picture, let's
just create a special new category for
>> So the the the Oscar statue that they
give Walt and Disney for Snow White is
the only one that's ever been made. It
is a large Oscar. It is Snow White and
then seven little Oscars below it.
[laughter]
Walt personally would go on to win more
Academy Awards than anyone in history.
Walt has 26 Academy Awards. The next
highest is 13. Yes. I mean, the audience
reception was incredible. Like you said,
Ben, it was the highest grossing film
ever made of of any kind, animated or
otherwise, in history to that point. The
critics's reception is equally glowing.
Time magazine writes prophetically that
Snow White is an authentic masterpiece
to be shown in theaters and beloved by
new generations long after the current
crop of Hollywood stars, writers, and
directors are sleeping where no prince's
kiss can wake them. [laughter]
Of course, foreshadowing the Disney
vault.
Snow White is alive and well today, as
my two young daughters will attest.
>> [laughter]
>> Yeah. The uh an interesting thing about
this story, I'm curious since you have
daughters who watch it, David, is it's
kind of dark and Walt did meaningfully
change the Brothers Grimm stories that
he sort of adapted it from. It's very
interesting that all of these early
Disney's cartoon movies animations are
adapted fairy tales or adapted existing
lore that Disney sort of changes. The
film was not really made as a children's
movie. No.
>> Yes, it was animated, but it's dark.
>> No. And in fact, a lot of those
decisions, like giving each of the seven
dwarves personalities,
in part were motivated to soften the
darkness of the fairy tale. And Walt
would always say that he didn't make
movies for children, but of course, he
wanted children to be able to watch
them, too. But some of the decisions
were actually made with the flywheel in
mind. And the dwarves personalities is
one of these.
>> They wanted to sell a lot of seven
dwarves merchandise. [laughter]
And what better way to do that than to
give them all distinct personalities.
>> It's true. When you go to Disneyland,
there's a lot of people walking around
with like dopey and grumpy.
>> Exactly. Exactly. So, as we said, the
movie itself extremely profitable. It
does $8 million in film rental revenue
against the $1.5 million production cost
just in its first theatrical run,
>> which dramatically changes the studio's
financial position.
>> Yes. Yes. Now, it is a bit of a
misconception that the profits from Snow
White, the film itself,
would end up paying for the new Burbank
studio that well, it's about to
construct. That's not entirely true. I
think most of the film profits from Snow
White went to repay all the loans to
Bank of America. Yes. So listeners, it's
worth diving into a little bit of the
complexity of how each of the parties in
the value chain of making and
distributing movies work. There's the
studio like Disney who makes the actual
movie. There's a distributor like United
Artists or RKO who does a lot of stuff.
They take the finished film. They create
all the prints that'll go to theaters.
They have the salesforce that sells the
film to theaters. They plan the film's
marketing. They also ship the films and
handle all of the billing and payments.
And then of course there's the theater
or the exhibitor as they're called. And
so Disney has this 1944 annual report
for employees that David actually found
when we were in the archives. We were
flipping through annual reports and you
were like, "What is this? There there's
two reports for 1944. What's going on
here?" And they actually did a different
one for employees than for shareholders.
The annual report for employees has this
great graphic that says where does the
money come from and has a breakdown of
if for a dollar getting spent at the box
office, what are the splits? And so 65%
actually gets retained at the exhibitor
or the theater, 13% goes to the
distributor, and 22% goes to the studio.
And so when we've been saying rentals,
here's the interesting thing about that.
The distributor and the studio come
together and they actually rent their
collectively owned film. Yes.
>> To the exhibitor. So this $8 million is
actually even higher than you think it
is. The gross box office would be
significantly higher than $8 million,
like 2.5x or something. And that 8
million is the 13% plus the 22%.
>> Right. It's the share of Disney the
studio plus their distributor.
>> That's exactly right. And so then I know
I'm doing some financial gymnastics
here.
>> Well, hey, all of this Hollywood
accounting, even through to this very
day, is so obscure and arcane. I think
on purpose so that neophites to the
business don't really understand the
deals that they're making. If you go
look at what is really the source of
truth here, the 1940 IPO prospectus,
which we are going to get to, you can
very clearly see that over a oneyear and
9-month period, they make $4.5 million
in film rental income, the producers
share, so this is just Disney's from
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfves. So
that's our real source of truth that we
know, $4.5 million. Now, they had about
$2.3 million of debt from the $1.5
million of production costs plus the
interest that they owed Bank of America.
>> Yep. So, a huge portion of the net that
they're taking home just from the box
office of Snow White is going to repay
the debt, let alone operating expenses
for the studio, etc., etc. So yes, it's
like great for the company, but it's not
quite as transformative from the box
office alone as people would think,
>> right? So they they effectively have
$2.2 million left over after paying the
theater, paying the distributor, paying
back the principal on the loan, and
paying the interest. Okay. $2.2 million
in 1937. Still a lot of money,
>> but uh they want to go build a gigantic
campus. Yes, but Ben, of course, Disney
isn't just making $2.2 million in
profits from Snow White. There's all
that good good Flywheel revenue to come
along with it. So, you know, if Walt
thought that the flywheel worked well
for Mickey Mouse, Snow White is like a
whole another level. So before the film
is even widely released around the
country, they have their next major
flywheel node, their next business model
innovation already in market,
the movie soundtrack. I couldn't believe
this when I learned it. Snow White was
the very first movie soundtrack ever
created and sold to the public. It all
started with Snow White. There were no
sound movie soundtrack albums before
then and it is a huge hit both because
you know it's a great soundtrack but
like before this album there was never
anything that audiences could take home
actually of the picture that they saw in
theaters. There's no home video, right?
There's no streaming. There's no
television. You go to see something in
the movie theater. Sure, you could buy a
piece of merch like a doll or a costume
and there were a lot of those out there
for Snow White, but you couldn't take
home the movie except in the form of the
soundtrack
>> and the songs are are quite catchy
whistle.
So, the soundtrack is huge. Beyond that,
there supposedly
[gasps] I read are 2,183
separate SKUs of Snow White merchandise
that get pumped into the global markets
by KKman's consumer products
organization. Unreal. The New York Times
actually writes this that quote, "Sales
of Snow White products might be
America's path out of the depression."
[laughter]
>> Wow.
>> That's how successful it was. I mean,
this movie was such a grand success
artistically for Walt filmwise, for the
studio, for the whole medium of
animation and legitimizing it right
alongside live action
and for the flywheel business model of
Disney. So, all of this enables Walt to
pursue his next dream, which is that he
wants to build a brand new
state-of-the-art
animators paradise. Ben, as you alluded
to, the new Disney Burbank animation
studio, still the uh corporate
headquarters of the company to this very
day,
>> right? He basically sees the success of
Snow White and thinks, "Oh, yeah. We're
going to do a lot lot more of these.
Let's let's build all the infrastructure
to like really do that, right?
>> Yes. So, Walt's goal with the new
Burbank studio was to be able to house
1,200 plus animators and staff up from
call it 300 before Snow White and then
Ben, what did you say 750 that the ranks
had swellled to during Snow White? Yep.
>> And he thinks that with this new campus,
everything that they're going to install
there, and all the additional staff,
that Disney will now be able to produce
two new feature animated releases every
single year, plus shorts. So, like, it
took three years to make Snow White.
With all the learning from that, all the
innovations of the new campus, all the
new staff, he thinks they're now going
to be able to pump out great new feature
films every six months,
>> which was a complete pipe dream and they
never were able to do.
>> Walt also in his mind think comes to see
this Burbank campus as really a utopian
like place kind of almost like a college
campus. I mean, Walt didn't even
graduate high school, let alone go to
college, but he intentionally places it
in Burbank, which back then was like the
sticks outside of LA.
>> He wanted the Disney lot, the Disney
studio to be this special place kind of
away from all these other studios
controlled by their distributor bosses
back in New York. And he kind of I think
really wanted to create this band of
merry men and women type feeling where
they could achieve the impossible like
producing two feature animated films a
year.
>> Well, the thing he sort of didn't factor
in is that you might be able to make
Snow White faster in the future, but
every idea that you have is going to be
a different new idea that's going to be
more ambitious and have more cost and
require more people. And so this Burbank
studio was necessary even to keep the
same
>> producing films every 3 years.
>> Yes.
>> But the the the lot itself is
unbelievable. It's 51 acres. There are
sports fields, a cafeteria. There's art
classes. There's massages available.
There's sunbathing in the penthouse
club. In many ways, this is like the
Google Plex before the Google Plex.
>> Yeah. This is 1940 when they opened
this.
>> Yes. And you're right. It's it's kind of
designed to keep you there. Why would
you need to go anywhere else? And really
there's nowhere else to go around here.
It reminds me a little bit of uh Epic
Systems, too.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Very similar.
Very similar.
>> So, here's an example of the lengths
that they went to on this campus.
>> So, I was looking at Google Maps
planning our visit, David, and it looks
weird. It's it's offset from the Burbank
Street grid at an angle. And we asked
the person who were showing David and I
around listeners uh why this is. And he
said that it was Walt's priority when
they were building it to offer the exact
perfect conditions for lighting to
animators, which of course, David, you
know the the spoiler here.
>> Yes. To have offices that face north
because northern light is true light.
>> Do you know why northern light is
preferable?
>> No, I just know that that's what our our
very kind tour guide told us.
>> So if you are in the northern
hemisphere, the sun moves across the
south sky. So if you're north facing
windows, your window offers the most
consistent and nondirect light. And so
every animator got a window and they
built the building shape so that there's
a whole ton of north facing sides. Like
the whole thing almost looks like a CPU
heat sink. It's like got fins so that
it's got all these north facing windows.
It's for the time it's an architectural
marvel. It's one of the first buildings
with air conditioning in Southern
California. The windows had customuilt
sort of slats that were adjustable so
the animator could let in the exact
right amount of sunlight, indirect
sunlight that they wanted into that
room. And once they sort of got this
building architecturally laid out on the
campus, they're like, "Yeah, let's build
the entire campus around this." And to
me, it really symbolizes that
>> animators are the crown of Disney in
this era. in the way that at Google it's
engineers and at Apple it's designers
and at at Microsoft it's PMs. Uh
[laughter] the the animators to the
extent that anyone but Walt has the
power the animators are sort of the most
valuable resource.
>> Yes. Yes. It's an animationdriven
company.
>> Yes. So it's got this like utopian vibe
but there were trade-offs. I mean this
was huge compared to the old Hyperion
site. People are more sectioned off to
do their specific work. You had less
access to Walt to know exactly what was
going on upstairs if you were the rank
and file. But to achieve all this, Walt
does need capital.
>> Yes. Oh, yes, he does.
>> He doesn't want to give up any control,
but eventually he and Roy decide, we've
only ever taken on bank loans. Maybe we
need another source of capital.
>> Yep. I've got the numbers on all of
this. So, the Burbank campus
construction costs alone were $3
million. So that's more than the money
they had left over from Snow White
proceeds after they repaid the Bank of
America debt. But obviously they had all
the, you know, the revenue from the
soundtrack and the consumer products and
all the flywheel revenue coming.
>> But still, they're they're planning to
do Pinocchio. They're planning to do
Fantasia,
>> right? So the 3 million is just to build
the facility. Then they got to staff it
with 1,200 animators. So that's an extra
new animation staff they need to hire.
And to feed Walt's vision of having
multiple films in production at the same
time, he greenlights production on
Pinocchio, Bambi, and Fantasia all at
the same time.
>> And all of these were completely
different animation styles. Yes. And
completely different from Snow White. If
you look at these films, we sort of have
this notion today of like, oh, it's the
Disney style that is not really
reflective in the darkness of Snow White
in Fantasia's really experimental
artistic vignette style set to classical
music. And Bambi is again another
completely different take of a very
naturalist film. These are wildly
different skill sets and bigger and
bigger investments using completely new
techniques. So you're not really just
like making more snow whites.
>> You're doing like discontinuous unknown
high-risisk bets.
>> Walt can't help himself.
>> Yes. So in total between the $3 million
for the campus and then these three
movies that they all have in production
which collectively cost about $5 million
in so-called negative costs before they
get released. So before they earn a
dollar of revenue by early 1940 Disney's
yeah in this new campus and set up for
this next phase of the company, but
they're $8 million in the hole. So, Bank
of America had loaned them another $4
and a half million dollars.
>> They just keep going to Bank of America
over and over again, just reorggaging
the company.
>> And then the hope was that Pinocchio,
the first of the new films to come out,
would be a hit and earn profits quickly.
Unfortunately, World War II had started
in Europe by early 1940 when Pinocchio
gets released. So international box
office is basically zero and Pinocchio
ends up losing money like a lot of money
over a million dollars in losses on
Pinocchio alone.
>> Yeah. In a scale economy's business if
you lose out on potential eyeballs and
potential revenue but your fixed costs
stay the same. That's super super bad
news. I mean you you there's no ability
to retroactively scale back how
ambitious you're being with investing in
a film. you know, you've already spent
all the money to create it and now you
find out that you can't distribute it to
half of your audience.
>> Yeah. Not good.
>> Yeah. Not to mention the impact on all
the rest of the flywheel businesses.
Like not a lot of Pinocchio merch
getting sold in Europe in summer of
1940.
>> No.
>> So after Pinocchio is a flop, Walt and
Roy decide they basically only have one
recourse at this point because Bank of
America is not going to loan them any
more money. They need to sell equity in
the company for the first time. So in
April 1940, Disney retains investment
bankers and sells 3.875
million of convertible preferred stock
with a 6% dividend, which technically is
Disney's IPO. Is it technically? It
doesn't go on a stock exchange. It's
just over the counter. It's a public
offering, I guess, but it's a pretty
small group of the public.
>> Exactly. Exactly. It is a non-exchangeed
public offering,
>> and it's got this 6% cumulative dividend
attached to it. So, the expectation when
you're investing is this company is
going to pay me 6% of my investment back
every year. Yep.
>> So, it's it's actually a pretty sweet
deal for the investors. They sell 30% of
the company to do this to raise that.
It's funny you said 3.875 875. A little
bit of that went to the bankers. There
was some [laughter] transaction fees.
So, they only raise about $3.5 million
directly to their balance sheet, but
they give up 30% of the company to do
that. And it comes with that 6%
cumulative dividend to those
shareholders.
>> Wow. So, this means they're flying even
closer to the sun than I realize cuz
they've got the $8 million in sort of
investments that they need to fund and
they have $4.5 million from Bank of
America and then if they're only getting
three.5 million in proceeds from the
IPO, that's exactly $8 million.
>> They are shaving off every piece of
their current self and future cash flows
to rebet the farm. That is the the way
to think about this. So that summer in
1940, Walt has a rather ominous get
together with Henry Ford of the Ford
Motor Company. Uh just sort of as like a
friendly meeting of these two American
business titans. And while they're
together, Walt mentions to Henry about
uh the IPO that they just did. And
reportedly Ford tells him, "Walt, if you
sold any of it, you should have sold all
of it." [laughter]
Ominous. Ominous. A real board of
directors gets established for the first
time as part of this and the preferred
get a director on the board. So an
outside voice in the company who
certainly is not going to share Walt's
vision here. So by the end of the year
in 1940, despite the capital raised from
the stock offering, Disney's in a cash
crunch. Uh Walt before the IPO had even
set up a kind of like proto employee
ownership system where they set aside
20% of the company's equity and used
that stake's profit distribution to fund
an annual employee bonus pool. They have
to eliminate that like months basically
after Walt institutes it. And what they
end up doing as a result is they raise
salaries of the few top animators in the
firm and then they keep the same or they
lower salaries for everybody else in the
Burbank lot. And this causes huge
resentment and unrest in the animation
workforce.
>> Yeah. I I mean I bet that's going to
make no one happy. But this is the like
literal trade-off. This is we spent a
bunch of money on Pinocchio. Yep. We
didn't have Europe, so we lost a bunch
of money on that. We still have big
ambitions.
And like this is Walt's implicit choice
here with going out and raising all this
debt, raising all this equity, betting
the farm again.
>> Yep. This is the downside of Walt's uh
always go for broke and shoot the works
philosophy.
>> Yep.
>> And it leads probably to the darkest
moment of Walt's life
>> that would change his relationship with
the company forever. forever and
irreparably
his relationship with Disney animation.
The strike. So on May 29th, 1941, the
Screen Cartoonist Guild, which is a
union that had unionized every other
major animation studio in Hollywood and
New York over the couple years leading
up to this,
>> which there were several of at this
point in time. We've been sort of very
Disneycentric, but there is an industry
around this.
>> Yep. decides finally to target Disney
employees. Now, there's a reason why the
Screen Cartoonist Guild had stayed away
from Disney despite it obviously being
the leader in animation up until this
point, which is I think Walt's utopian
dream more or less was true or at least
true enough. Like, he established the
bonus pool for animation. He constructed
this campus. everything you were talking
about earlier, Ben, but here with the
cash crunch, that all comes crashing
down.
>> Yeah. There's a great excerpt from the
book The Animated Man by Michael
Barrier. In the spring of 1941, under
pressure from the Bank of America and
holders of preferred stock, Walt Disney
Productions agreed to scale back its
production cost to about $15,000 a week.
According to Walt Disney himself, that
meant he had to hold the negative cost
of new features to about $700,000 or
onethird the cost of Pinocchio or
Fantasia, which was also in development
at the time. Since labor costs made up
85 to 90% of Disney's total costs,
implementing such severe economies would
mean laying off more than half the
staff.
>> O, so you've got cost reduction in some
of the people sticking around. And
you've got big layoffs because Pinocchio
didn't pay back.
>> Yeah. Well, layoffs coming. they haven't
happened yet and this is part of why the
organization and the strike happens. So
hundreds of employees end up striking.
They pick it the Burbank campus. They
march all day. They carry signs with
slogans like Snow White and the 700
dwarves or uh what is a drawing of
Pinocchio with the caption no strings on
me. The strike lasts for three and a
half months and it's a completely
shattering event for Walt personally and
for the company. As the union is
organizing the employee base in the days
and weeks leading up to the strike, Walt
decides that he's going to make a speech
and address the entire company, which he
thinks, well, he will explain his
position and the challenging state that
the company's in and it will resolve
everything and the employees will rally
around him and the company.
Unfortunately, it has the opposite
effect. It is a complete disaster. He
lectures the entire company for nearly 3
hours. Some of his lines from the
speech, which he had written out ahead
of time, so it's preserved, are, "My
first recommendation to the lot of you
is this. Put your own house in order.
You can't accomplish a damn thing by
sitting around and waiting to be told
everything. If you're not progressing as
you should, instead of grumbling and
growling, do something about it." And
then don't forget this. It's the law of
the universe that the strong shall
survive and the weak must fall by the
way. And I don't give a damn what
idealistic plan is cooked up. Nothing
can change that.
Probably not what you want to tell your
employee base after you just slash their
salaries. Yeah. Yeah. A labor magazine
would write afterwards, "Walt Disney's
speech recruited more members for the
Screen Cartoonist Guild than a year of
campaigning.
>> [sighs and gasps]
>> Yeah, about the worst reaction that you
could possibly have. And Walt, I don't
know if you found this in your research,
but it seems like he's kind of deluded
here into thinking, well, it's not
actually my employees that are doing
this. It's these communist, very few
communist agitators who have undercover
become my employees and they're riing up
the rest of them. and Walt's like kind
of removed himself and he's in denial
that this is actually what his workforce
wants. The the the family atmosphere
that we had at Hyperion is now a like
real corporate, you know, have and have
knots here on Burbank campus.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah. It's a mess. And then it
gets worse. So in the middle of the
strike, which again lasts for three and
a half months, that hundreds of
employees are gone from their jobs that
are not working and marching and
protesting outside the company
>> while they're trying to make Bambi,
which is equally ambitious,
>> right? Walt is just so depressed and in
denial and upset about the whole thing
that in August of 1941, he agrees to go
on a goodwill trip to Latin America with
Nelson Rockefeller's office of the
coordinator of interamerican affairs.
This is the trip that ultimately results
in the Disney films Saludos amigos and
the three cabayeros. If you've seen
those or been to the three cabarios ride
in Disney World in Epcot, it's actually
great.
>> It also results in Roy having to resolve
the strike because Walt is uninterested
in dealing with it.
>> Yeah. The real reason Walt goes on this
trip and he would write about he would
call it a quote godsend and say that it
gives him a chance to get away from this
god-awful nightmare in Burbank.
Yeah. He basically just leaves the
country and walks out on the whole thing
and tells Roy to settle it. I'm leaving
for 10 weeks. Do your best.
>> Yep. So, while Walt is gone in Latin
America, Roy does settle the strike
after federal mediation. Disney ends up
recognizing the Screen Cartoonist Guild
union. They raise salaries for the
remaining employees and they agree to a
negotiated layoff of over 500
employees. So, taking total headcount
before the strike down from 1,200 to
under 700. These are the layoffs, Ben,
that you referred to.
>> The studio would never fully recover
from this. Certainly not under Walt and
not for many, many years afterwards.
Really, not at all in the period of
classical animation before computer
animation comes along. And sort of
equally as importantly, Walt would never
recover from this as it pertains to his
relationship with the company Walt
Disney Productions. Yes.
>> It no longer feels like his family. It
feels like a creation he's made that has
sort of run away from his control.
>> Yep. He ultimately does decide that the
company Disney and he Walt Disney have a
creative and business future. But yeah,
he never has the same relationship to
the studio or animation after this.
>> Yep. He apparently according to Don
Lusk, who was an animator there, made a
list of everyone who went out on strike
and said that uh everyone on this list
isn't true to Disney and one day will
not be here.
>> Yeah. So Ben, you mentioned uh Walt's
sort of anti-communist streak that comes
out of this. Yeah. For the rest of his
life, he would blame all of this on
communist influences in Hollywood. He
would actually testify after World War
II in front of the House on American
Activities Committee, you know, Huak as
a friendly witness corroborating
communist infiltration in Hollywood. He
named names of people who he said were
communists based on things he had heard
about them like no even proof. And
you've got like a major figurehead of a
big US corporation testifying. There's
all this video of it of him saying I
believe so and so is a communist.
>> Yeah. And of course this would lead to
the famous Hollywood blacklist and you
know all the terrible stuff that comes
out of that. One thing later sort of by
association with this uh people would
accuse Walt of being anti-Semitic since
much of the communist movement in in the
US and especially in Hollywood was in
the Jewish community. Gabler
investigates this pretty thoroughly in
his book and concludes that there's not
any evidence that Wald ever really was
anti-Semitic. I turned over every stone
I possibly could on this company and we
spent I don't know the better part of
the year so far researching this and I
found zero evidence of that.
>> Yeah, same definitely anti-communist for
sure. Uh yep,
>> but um anyway, so [sighs] speaking of
the [snorts] war,
>> by the way, this is like four giant
blows to the company in a row. You've
got Europe dropping even before the US
enters the war. You've got the the
European distribution falling off.
There's a thing we didn't talk about
which was Fantasia tried to make this
giant bet in a new type of sound for
movies called Santa sound.
>> This alone almost killed the company.
The budget for Fantasia was 50% bigger
than Snow White.
>> And in the first run at the box office,
they tried to use Fanta Sound, this new
sound technology they had invented, and
distributors didn't pick it up to do
like a real first run. And so out of the
$2.3 million budget in that first year
it came out in 1941 they recouped
325,000.
>> Wow. That is a giant loss on Fantasia. I
think Disney was also funding the
development and and distribution of
Fantasound. So you've got those two then
the strike. Now the US enters the war.
>> Yeah. One more note on Fantasia though.
Uh before we talk about the impact of
the US entering the war, do you know
what ultimately ended up happening with
Fantasia?
>> They made Fantasia 2000, 60 years later?
No. [laughter]
>> Yes, that is true, but that is not what
I was getting at. So yeah, the initial
release of Fantasia, as you said, was a
total flop. They couldn't exhibit it
anywhere, lost tons and tons of money.
Later, it has this huge resurgence. I
mean, I remember when I was growing up
as a kid, my parents loved Fantasia.
>> Yeah. I actually thought Fantasia was a
modern movie. It's crazy to me that it
was Disney's second.
>> Right. Right. Right. I think it was like
the 60s and the hippies that thought
like, "Oh, this is like the coolest
[laughter] thing." So, Fantasia, if you
look today at the list of
inflationadjusted
top films in history by box office
gross, inflation adjusted, Fantasia is
the 24th highest grossing film in
Hollywood history. [laughter]
>> Unbelievable.
>> So, it has all
>> and kind of timeless.
>> Totally. It's an amazing amazing
production. I mean, the music, the
symphonies, the sound, it's go watch
Fantasia if you've never seen it. It is
[laughter] well worth your time.
>> And now a hard cut over to World War II,
right?
Okay, so back to 1941.
No sooner does Roy settle the strike
than Pearl Harbor happens and the US now
enters World War II. And unlike many of
the other great American companies of
that era that we've covered on this show
before where World War II was great for
their business like Coca-Cola or Mars or
Lockheed,
World War II is a disaster for Disney.
Nothing of value gets built for Disney
during the war. It basically breaks
every single node in the flywheel. And
on top of the strike, it just completely
grinds to a halt. All new core IP
production for the studio.
>> Yeah. So, the first thing that happens
is within hours and then days of Pearl
Harbor getting bombed, the US military
moves into the studio. They look at
Burbank and they think, "This is a great
asset." And so hundreds of troops, there
are two reasons that set up shop using
the sound stages to work on all the
optical systems for anti-aircraft. Sound
systems are awesome. There's no windows.
It's a giant room. I mean, like it's
it's the the thing you would want for
stuff like this. The second reason that
I suspect you're hinting at, David, is
it is real close to Lockheed.
>> Yes. real close specifically to Lockheed
Skunkworks department
>> which is in Burbank. The secret Lockheed
Skunk Works
>> airplane hangers and and department was
in Burbank because Burbank was the
sticks back then and Disney is right
next door. So that's probably the bigger
reason why the military requisitions the
Disney lot is to protect Skunk Works.
>> Fascinating. Yeah.
>> So you've got that happening. You've got
a whole bunch of the animators getting
drafted.
>> Yep.
>> I mean, so you're you're you're down
manpower. You're just coming out of the
strike. You have these huge failures in
Pinocchio, Fantasia. And also Bambi.
Again, you've lost European
distribution.
>> Yep.
>> And so the appetite for
making more things like those three
movies drops to like zero. I mean, at
this point, there's a financial reality
that Disney owes a dividend to these uh
shareholders, which interestingly
enough, it actually suspended in 1942.
They actually didn't pay out the
dividend, but they do have to pay Bank
of America. The films aren't going to be
the thing doing it. And conveniently,
they've got the US government saying,
"Can you help us with some propaganda
films? Can you help us encourage people
to pay their taxes and buy war bonds and
support the troops?" And so Disney kind
of looks at everything, how it's all
playing out, and says, "Yeah, that's
what we're going to be doing for the
war."
>> So all of the studio production work
during the US's time as an active
participant in World War II. Yeah.
Basically just gets repurposed to
propaganda and training materials for
the government.
>> And insanely they do use Disney IP. like
you see all these crazy old posters with
like you know Donald Duck holding a gun
and I mean the stuff you sort of would
never see with these characters today
but not only did Disney say we're work
for hire they said we can use the Disney
IP but interestingly David do you know
about Mickey Mouse's role
>> no
>> they really did not employ Mickey Mouse
>> they protected Mickey Mouse from the war
image and Donald Duck sort of led the
charge.
>> Interesting.
>> On all the the the war films.
>> Well, part of this was because uh
canonically Donald Duck is a sailor,
right?
>> Oh, okay. That makes sense.
>> Yeah. Yeah. But then it makes sense to
protect Mickey, too.
>> And Donald's also the more like fighter
of a [laughter] character.
>> Yeah. Mickey started off as this
troublemaker, but then kind of became
the like nice protagonist.
>> Yeah. The goody two shoes. And then
Donald was the foil.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. So all of this though to our point
earlier does nothing either for the
flywheel model or for generating new IP
to feed it
>> or pushing the envelope of technology or
pushing the bounds of creativity like
all the things that contribute to
Disney's core that they they are
financially floated though by the war. I
mean the way that they make it through
this period is they actually are
generating net income reliably not a lot
but
>> from the government work.
>> Exactly. And there's one other big
innovation, an actual bright spot that
comes out of this back against the wall
moment during the war that the company's
in financially. Do you know what that
is?
>> Ooh.
Uh oh. The Disney vault.
>> The vaults. Yes.
>> Yes. So in 1944, the company is so
cashstrapped that they come up with the
again at the time crazy seeming idea to
re-release Snow White in theaters
because hey, we can't make new stuff,
but people sure like that old movie.
Let's just put it in theaters and see
what happens.
>> And the thing you got to remember is
with no home video and no TV, no one had
seen Snow White in seven years.
>> Exactly. It truly vanished off the face
of the earth except for the copies of
the film that were held in the Disney
vault.
>> In the Disney vault. Yes. So in 1944
they re-release Snow White in theaters
and it brings in $3 million
in revenue to Disney on just a like a
few hundred,000 in cost. They basically
just got to print a few new copies of
the film and then distributed it out to
theaters.
>> Right. The theaters get their normal
cut, the distributor gets their normal
cut, but Disney's cost to develop the
film is like zero.
>> Yeah, they've already developed it. It's
already done. This is an enormous boost
for the company. And Ben, to your point
about the 7-year gap since the initial
release, it turns out conveniently that
7 years is just about the right amount
of time for a new generation of children
to come along and reach an age uh where
they would be interested in consuming
Snow White that haven't seen it before
and they discover it for the first time
and yet it's infrequent enough that it
doesn't dilute the IP. So Walt's got an
amazing quote on this actually from the
second re-release in 1951 of Snow White.
In the 8 years since then, our first
re-release, our potential audience has
been increased by 25 million children
who either were not born or were too
young to attend a motion picture theater
in 1944. You're an adult much longer
than you're a kid.
>> It's so amazing. And they totally
stumble into the seven-year thing. Like
it's not like they intended when they
made Snow White to say, "Okay, we're
going to put it in the vault and then
seven years from now we're going to take
it out." It just happened that seven
years later they had a big cash crunch.
They needed some easy profits and they
put Snow White back in theaters. And 7
years, you know, give or take a couple
years basically becomes the core Disney
IP cadence to this very day. And Disney
could uniquely do it versus other
studios because their IP was more
timeless. It's animated and it's based
on these timeless sort of lessons and
these fairy tales of old. Like there
there are these
simple but resonant stories and it
carries through right to today. What is
the cadence between Disney's Frozen
movies today?
>> Frozen 1 comes out 2013.
>> Frozen 2 comes out 2019.
>> Frozen 3 slated for release next year
2027.
six to eight years like clockwork.
>> It's interesting they've applied it to
sequels now, too.
>> Yep.
>> All right. So, now we've got four
components to the flywheel business.
Your original three, genuinely
compelling new intellectual property
with characters that you resonate with.
Two, maximize distribution of each
element in the primary delivery vehicle.
You've got three, feed that IP into as
many ancillary profitable flywheel nodes
as possible. And now we've got four.
Yep.
>> The vault, the re-releases.
>> Strategically re-release it every seven
or so years. Frequently enough to
capture each new generation of children,
but not too frequently lest you dilute
its impact
>> with effectively evergreen content.
>> Yep. [laughter] Roy has a great quote
that he would tell the Wall Street
Journal many years later. Our product is
practically eternal.
[laughter]
And it's so true.
>> Yep.
>> So despite this genuine innovation of
adding the vault concept to the
flywheel, by the time the war ends in
1945,
Disney is not in a good place. The
flywheel is basically completely broken.
There hasn't been any compelling IP
generated for the past several years.
And worst of all, Walt himself is
disengaged and disillusioned.
>> Yeah. But clearly something happened
because the Disney [laughter] we know
today is quite successful.
>> Yes. But before we continue the story.
>> Yes. Listeners, this is a great time to
thank our friends at Service Now,
longtime friends of the show. So if you
are managing a large enterprise today,
you've got AI everywhere. You've got
co-pilots and models and agents all
running across every team. And the
promise was simple. Add AI and the
results will follow. But enterprises are
now realizing that the hard part was
never adding AI. It's making it work,
>> right? It's got to have the right
context and connect to the workflows
that matter. Plus, it's got to be
secure, stay governable, and still be
able to take real actions. You get all
that working together, and that's when
magic happens.
>> Yes. And for those like two of you out
there who've never been to Disneyland,
[laughter]
the magic isn't just from one great
ride. It's from the whole experience
being seamless. The daily parades, the
sightelines, the characters appearing
exactly at the right moment. It looks
effortless, but behind the scenes,
thousands of moving parts are being
coordinated in real time from a control
center that nobody ever sees. And that's
what Service Now has been building for
over 20 years. The foundation AI needs
to succeed. And they've done it at
scale. Over a 100red billion workflows,
trillions of transactions, and the
operational knowledge of how work
actually gets done. That's why more than
85% of the Fortune 500 work with Service
Now.
>> And as the AI control tower, they're
giving companies a single place to
manage all of it. Not just agents, but
every AI system across your business. So
listeners, if you are wrangling AI
across your company, go check out
service.com/acquired
and just tell them that Ben and David
sent you. All right, so we're coming out
of the war. There's sort of [laughter] a
few moving parts here at Disney right
now. So the revenue from the government
has dried up. So that the thing that was
putting them on sound financial footing
is not there for the sort of quick
revenue hits. The long-term stuff other
than the re-releases, they haven't
stoked the fire in a while.
>> So the strategy over these next few
years is to sort of kickstart to try to
do stuff that doesn't cost a lot of
money but might have a lot of return.
>> And so they try a bunch of stuff on the
animation side. They do packages where
they take a bunch of shorts and they
package them together as feature films.
These are movies that you almost
assuredly have never seen called like
Make Mine Music or Fun and Fancyfree.
Not big successes. The other thing they
try in animation is to go back to the
original Alice's idea of combining
animation and live action. The result of
that is the movie Song of the South.
Yeah. which historians look back on as
racist and deeply problematic. And uh
Disney has never released on home video
or streaming. So uh not a big success
for the flywheel there either. And for
the first time in animation, there's now
actually real competition in the
marketplace. So before the war, Warner
Brothers had started Looney Tunes, you
know, with like Daffy Duck and Porky Pig
and then Elmer Fud and of course
>> Bugs Bunny.
>> Ironically, it's a former Disney story
department employee, Charles Thorson,
that does the initial designs for Bugs
Bunny.
>> And then in 1940, you know, same year it
all started to fall apart for Disney,
Joseph Barbara and William Hannah start
working together. They produce Tom and
Jerry for MGM. So the other major
studios
>> and the Flintstones.
>> Yeah. The Flintstones, of course. Yeah.
The other major studios are starting to
creep in on the animation game. And so
by this post-war period, these other
studios had grown in popularity and were
really starting to rival Disney.
Meanwhile, Disney, they go the other way
and they get into live action.
>> Yeah. They somehow had a bunch of cash
tied up in Europe that they couldn't
repatriate, so they needed to spend it
in London. So, they went and shot a
liveaction film, Treasure Island, in
London, which did well for them. Live
action is far less expensive to create.
You can do it fast, and they needed to
do something with this cash. But, you
know, you're not buying a lot of
Treasure Island merch today. It's not
durable like the the animated stuff.
>> As we talked about earlier, live action
doesn't feed the flywheel, at least for
Disney, in quite the same way.
>> Yep. They started doing nature
documentaries. They did one called Seal
Island shot in Alaska. They also started
studying the emerging TV medium to see
if they should do something here, but at
this point in time decide, nah,
basically not. But we'll watch it and
see. We're very interested. But Walt
Hart really was in animation. He wanted
to get back to making animated feature
films that push the envelope. Roy,
meanwhile, hates this idea since the
studio is not on good financial footing.
It has lots of debt. Walt ultimately has
to give an ultimatum that if we don't
get back to this, then we should just
sell the company. Like, what are we even
doing here?
>> In 1950, Roy capitulates and the company
went and raised another $2 million to
finance their next film, which was
Cinderella.
>> The first bright spot in a long time
>> and their first fulllength feature film
in eight years since Bambi in 1942.
>> And the way they made Cinderella was
quite different, right? Yeah. So Walt
pounds the table to make this thing and
then he kind of realizes the way they
are going to make it feels compromised
to him because the budget just can't be
what they were blowing before in those
early 40s to try to really push the
envelope.
>> Yeah. There's a great quote from the
animator Frank Thomas who worked on
Cinderella. We planned Cinderella more
carefully and shot it all in live action
first so we could judge it. This was
without costumes or a set. just go on a
sound stage and see whether that scene's
going to work. Walt said, "We can't
afford to animate it and then change it.
The animation has to be right the first
time." Yeah. Not the mindset that they
took into Snow White.
>> And this basically flips the like
liveaction animation thing from a source
of inspiration and study to a crutch. So
they were filming every scene and then
rotoscoping effectively like tracing the
liveaction footage out of the camera to
make it animated which can lead to this
much more rigid feeling animation. Also
once you film it you are completely
locked into that view. It's not like you
can move the theoretical camera because
you haven't really built the muscle to
animate in that style for the film. So
you're kind of stuck with this like how
it looked in the camera is how we trace
it on paper. It just had less of the
like lavish detail that they put into
Pinocchio and Bambi. All this ultimately
leads to like Walt's hard is just not in
it. He he kind of helps kickstart the
whole thing but then is not engaged
during the production of this film. It
does end up being a critical and
commercial huge success though. Yes.
>> I believe it makes basically the same
amount of money as Snow White. I think
it does $8 million in film rentals in
the first year.
>> Yep. On a cost of 2.2 million.
>> Yep.
>> So really, this is the first big
financial success for the company since
before the war. It's the biggest success
since Snow White. It got the company
back on sound footing after a pretty
gnarly uh time.
>> Gnarly decade there. Yeah. But yeah, so
Cinderella is is a huge bright spot. It
was a onetime financial boost to the
studio that didn't solve all the
company's problems, but it did get
animation back on the right foot
creatively. Even though Walt was no
longer, you know, as deeply involved as
he was in the Snow White era, it did
turn things around enough that like at
least they were making quality work
again. And like obviously those films
still hold up today. Over the next few
years, they then released Alice in
Wonderland, which surprise ballooned
over budget and did not pay back. That
is in part because a lot of historians
say it's a film that Walt felt like he
should do because of his reverence for
the source material.
>> Yep.
>> But never quite had a clear idea on
exactly what to do with it. So, it's
it's hard to put together these sort of
disjoint vignettes into one cohesive
film, but artistically beautiful. So,
put a pin in that. We'll come back to
it. But interesting comment on Alice
from the 1951 annual report from Roy.
>> Alice has not performed as well at the
box office as Cinderella. Because of
these circumstances, which were
generally poor attendance at theaters,
he actually blames the macro, which is
interesting. And because Alice in
Wonderland is our highest cost feature,
it is not expected to produce a profit
from its first release. However, it is a
classic property which should be a
valuable asset to the company
indefinitely.
>> And hey, he was right.
>> Yep.
>> All right. So, we've talked about Walt
being disengaged here. What is he doing?
[sighs and gasps]
>> So, Walt
is playing with trains. [laughter]
>> I mean, [snorts]
>> yes, he is. That's about the best way
that I can frame this is he's getting
really into trains and really into
miniatures.
>> Yes. Trains, specifically model trains
and miniatures like miniature furniture
and like rooms in homes in miniatures.
>> Yeah. I mean, gosh, I said we weren't
going to dive into Walt's psyche on this
episode, but I kind of think about this.
This is me editorializing
as
this like soulsearching half decade
where he's just looking for what is he
going to get passionate about next cuz
he's sort of bored like animation isn't
doing it for him the way that it used to
and he's like reaching back into his
childhood for inspiration.
>> And the way Walt would frame this is
that he was developing these hobbies to
keep his mind off of the problems at the
studio. That's what he would always say,
>> right? That these were nice things to do
after a hard day at work.
>> Y
>> but they became obsessions.
>> Yes.
>> When I said reaching back into his
childhood, there was a train that ran
through Marceline, which is why
Marceline existed. And there's this like
deep-seated psyche around trains and
small town America. He and some of the
other senior animators developed this
interest in largecale model trains,
which are 1/8 the scale of an actual
railroad train. So like big like ones
you could ride around sitting on top of.
There's amazing old footage of of Walt
like riding around on these these 1/8
scale trains.
>> Yep. So Walt took this extremely
seriously. He ends up traveling to the
1948 and 1949 Chicago train fair and he
kind of dove into this community of
fellow train enthusiasts. I was thinking
this was strange. Like I kept reading
about this and I was like this is wild.
There were six million train
enthusiasts, like model train
enthusiasts at the time. This was
actually like a pretty big thing.
>> Yeah. This isn't like billionaire
hobbies today. This is like a Wald
hanging out with other enthusiasts kind
of man of the people style.
>> Yes. And it was something that was
really tangible for him to do with his
hands. I mean, he was building some of
the train cars himself. He he actually
had a workspace in the machine shop in
Burbank where he was building with the
machine shop staff. There was a guy
Roger Broki who sort of led the machine
shop team who would go on to build a
serious serious model train for Walt.
Roger would also become just to
foreshadow here the first Imagineer.
>> Yes. Yes. Yes. Well, just to foreshadow
even more all of this would lead
[laughter] to Imagineering.
>> Yes. So, this team in the machine shop
uh and Walt end up building this train
and and David, you were saying like man
of the people style in a very not man of
the people style thing. He ends up
sinking $50,000
which is like a giant amount of money at
the time and a huge amount of his
personal liquidity in 1950 into building
a train in his backyard. There was a
half mile of track that went through a
tunnel. That tunnel that which he dug
under his wife's garden on its own was
90 ft long.
>> Yes. When Walt gets obsessed with
something, he he goes to un unreasonable
extremes.
>> When he and his wife were looking at
houses to figure out where what property
they were going to buy and then build a
house on, a major consideration was, is
there room for a giant train to be laid
out? He ends up, it's on Carolwood
Avenue, I believe, Carolwood Street, and
he ends up naming it the Carolwood
Pacific. The uh steam engine is named
the Lily Bell after his wife. It's a
whole thing.
>> Yep. And if you go to Disneyland or
Disney World today, most of the steam
engines of the railroads are named in
callbacks to this period and this
inspiration in Walt's life. So, there's
the Lily Bell engine at Walt Disney
World. There's the Ward Kimble who is
the original animator that gets him into
this hobby. There's the Roger Broie as
you're saying and uh then there's also
the Roy Disney.
>> Oh, nice. I did not know that. So, this
is great quote in a PBS American
Experience documentary by historian
Nancy Conn where she's reflecting on
Walt in this moment and her quote is, "I
can't control my employees. Turns out I
can't control the larger stage right
now. I can't even completely control my
company. So, here's a world I can
recreate down to the smallest detail
that is mine and perfect.
>> And it would become something much
bigger that would also be his and also
be perfect.
>> Yes. So, out of this stew comes
Disneyland.
>> Yes. Which is so funny because Walt
would insist in interviews until his
dying day that quote, "The idea for
Disneyland came about when my daughters
were very young. And as I'd sit there
while they rode the merry-goround, I
felt that there should be something
built where parents and children could
have fun together. So that's how
Disneyland started. It all started from
a daddy with two daughters wondering
where he could take them where he could
have a little fun with them, too.
>> It's also that,
>> you know, I'm sure that's part of it.
>> Yeah,
>> some of both, but really the trains.
[laughter]
>> Okay, so how did Disneyland happen?
Well, the initial thing was actually
pretty small.
>> Yep. the initial idea.
>> Yes, there was a name floated Mickey
Mouse Village that sort of quickly
changed to Disneyland since uh it was
much more about his new passions,
trains, Americana, and miniatures than
it was about Mickey Mouse. And he
started working with artists to sketch
out what it would be. And the constraint
that he had was we've got this 16 acre
plot of land that's adjacent to the
Burbank studio lot between that and the
river. So that's sort of what we're
working with here.
>> Yeah. And that's the natural place you
would put this.
>> Of course. Of course. So in March of
1952, Walt announces it Disneyland to be
constructed on that little strip of land
>> for a cost of $1.5 million.
>> A Snow White.
>> A Snow White. Yeah, we should speak in
units of Snow White. It's actually
cheaper than a Snow White given the
inflation.
>> Right. Right. Right. Much cheaper than a
Snow White. It's now been uh 15 years.
So, he decides, I'd actually like to
spend some money on a larger study for
this because I've got a couple of like
artist renderings here that include cool
little river and a train that runs on
this and we're going to figure out, you
know, attractions that that go in this
thing, but we really got to jam a lot in
here. So, I'd like more money.
>> Roy and the board are none too enthused
about this.
>> Yeah. Think about everything that we
have said over the last, I don't know,
hour about the state of the company. And
Walt is saying, "Hey, I found a thing
I'm interested in. Can I have some money
to explore building this kind of like
inarticulatable idea?" Yeah. Right next
to the studio lot.
>> Yeah. It kind of goes over like a lead
balloon.
>> Yes. So, the Walt Disney Company at this
time called Walt Disney Productions does
not free up the purse strings for this.
So, what does Walt do? He kind of talks
to Roy about it and they they they
figure out a path forward. He's going to
start his own company that would get
formalized later in the year in 1952
that ends up being called Wed
Enterprises. We wed Walter Elias Disney.
His personal company that he can do
>> weird personal stuff with. [laughter]
>> Yes. [snorts] So over the course of
1952,
Walt starts poaching people from Disney
to work on this thing.
>> And at first it's just like a halfozen
people and they're set up in a building
on the back lot at Burbank. These would
become the first Imagineers.
>> Yes.
>> And the interesting thing is the people
he's poaching, these are artists and
they're animators. that are being hired
to build a theme park and like big
physical trains. This gives you a sense
of Walt's leadership style. He would
take a talented, creative person and
he'd be perfectly willing to assign them
to things that they've never done before
and say, "Yeah, he'll figure it out."
>> We also just got to pause here for a
minute and really underline what's
happening here. This is Walt Disney.
>> Yes. By this point in history, he is the
Walt Disney. He is the Walt Disney who
has come up with a crazy new idea based
on his obsessive hobby with model trains
that the board of Disney Studios has
basically rejected. And so he has gone
full crackpot like Colonel Kurtz style
[laughter]
and started his own separate company on
the Disney campus where he is poaching
and recruiting some of the best Disney
animators and artists to come over and
stop doing animation and start working
with him building a theme park.
[laughter] That is what is happening
here. I was about to make the comment,
"Oh, this sounds a lot like Elon Musk."
But none of Elon's companies have a
board that would vote against him. And
so that's really the only difference
here is kind of the like Elon before
Elon.
>> Yes.
>> So there ends up being two problems with
this plan. One is Walt and the
architecture company that he hired kind
of come to the conclusion that this plot
of land, it's just too small. Even with
all the clever ideas to be space
efficient, there's just too much that he
wants to do with this Disneyland
concept. It keeps growing in scope to
accomplish all of it in that little
strip of land. The second problem is
after provisional approval, the Burbank
City Council starts to learn more and
they decline the proposal since they do
not want a quote carnival-like
atmosphere right there on the side of
the river.
>> You could describe Disneyland as lots of
things, but carnival-like atmosphere.
[laughter] Clearly, they did not get the
vision,
>> right? The the magic is that it isn't.
It very easily could have been. So, they
need to find a bigger plot of land and
they need to uh work with a team that is
really good at odd research-based tasks.
And you're never going to guess,
listeners, where he goes for this. It is
like a a crazy nugget of history. He
goes to SRRI, the Stanford Research
Institute. If you've heard SRRI before,
it is one letter off from Siri, which
was a spinout of SRRI. Yes, that SRRI
>> that it was I was just going to say that
you you just triggered like, you know,
probably two million phones, [laughter]
>> some of which are running uh the betas,
so they'll have the new Siri AI.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Uh, yes. SRS SRRI is
the research firm that Walt hires to go
identify what ultimately becomes
Anaheim. The perfect spot. They
absolutely knock it out of the park. But
when you describe it, the site sounds
completely nuts. 10 times bigger than
the original site, a full 160 acres.
>> Yep.
>> 25 miles away from Los Angeles. It is
currently just some orange groves.
Anaheim itself was a small farming town.
There wasn't even a highway connecting
it to Los Angeles.
>> There was a planned highway.
>> Yes. So, there's a quote from the
animated man by Michael Barrier. The
SRRI analysis from August 1953 took into
account a large number of factors
including likely population growth,
freeway construction, and the effect of
terrain on television transmission.
Since the idea was that TV will play an
important part in the promotion and
development of Disneyland, the study
pointed toward a location southeast of
Los Angeles in Anaheim in Orange County,
just off the Santa Ana Freeway. That
freeway was then under construction, but
most of it between downtown Los Angeles
and Orange County was scheduled for
completion. The foresight of all the
factors that they considered there,
>> just incredible.
>> So, uh, there is one problem though,
which is great. We found the perfect
site. It's 160 acres and we're going to
do this much bigger and better than we
were before. We're going to need some
money.
>> We're going to need a lot of money. So,
Walt goes back to the company.
>> Yes. And remember, they had no interest
in pursuing this, which is why he had to
set up Wed in the first place. It's
becoming clear that this is happening. I
mean, Walt Disney is a force of nature
and Roy becomes supportive or at least
as supportive as
>> strong armed into supporting this,
>> right? While still trying to protect the
company. And so in 1953 in April, Walt
Disney Productions board of directors,
this is a public company, agreed to a
personal services contract with Walt and
contracts with WED to design and build
the Disneyland Park attractions. This is
done as a cost plus contract. So Wed and
Walt personally don't have to take any
risk at least in in this part of it. It
is just like we will pay you whatever it
is plus your profit margin to go build
stuff and you know it's kind of a blank
check. There are some pretty wild other
terms in this personal services contract
according to a 1990 article decades
later in the LA Times. Walt is allowed
to pursue outside projects which
effectively gives him all the benefits
of being a free agent while still
drawing his $153,000
salary from Walt Disney Productions.
Okay, another point. Walt argues that he
should be compensated for the use of his
name. He ends up getting it again,
worked into this deal, and the contract
awards him 10% of all merchandise sold.
>> Wow, I actually didn't find this. This
is wild. So, here's the next bullet
point. He will now get the right to
invest alongside Walt Disney Productions
in each liveaction film project, which
he would later do on Mary Poppins and
other films. So, why did he negotiate
for this? I mean, my feeling about Wald
after doing all this research is that he
didn't actually really care that much
personally about money. Was he trying to
accumulate cash so that he could fund
Disneyland?
>> Exactly.
>> Exactly. There's also some like personal
stuff tied up in here, his relationship
with the company where he's like, "It's
not really mine anymore, so I kind of
want more out of it." That's sort of the
less generous take on it. But he and Roy
definitely kind of came to this
understanding of, well, if Walt is going
to have to fund a lot of this, then we
need to figure out a way for Walt to get
more cash so that he can do
>> I see this is happening no matter what.
So, we can do it the easy way or we can
do it the hard way. [laughter]
>> It is interesting on his relationship
with money. He was interested in money
but for the sake of deploying it. I
mean, hoarding money was never his
thing. Like, he did live extravagantly
compared to most people. hit that train
and you know a vacation house in Palm
Springs and all that, but it's not what
the other big Hollywood moguls were
doing. Lillian Disney has a comment in
1956. She said, "I've always been
worried. I have never felt secure.
Never.
>> He's always telling us how wealthy we
are, how much we've got, and we haven't
got anything."
>> And she's kind of right
>> because he's always putting it back in.
>> Yes. And it's all tied up in the
enterprise value of Disney, which he
keeps sort of reorggaging and rebetting
the farm.
>> Yes. So there's that angle. He also
always believed in the park just like he
always believed that animation feature
animation had a long runway ahead of it.
And I I was trying to think of the best
way to contextualize this. So to
validate him there, this is a crazy stat
and just how right he was about all of
this. Walt built this company over his
entire lifetime from age 21 until he
died in 1966.
And if you look at the company's market
cap today compared to where it was in
1966,
99.95%
of the value was created after Walt
Disney died.
>> Yep.
>> There was just so much more running room
with his concept than he had time on
this earth to execute.
>> Yep.
>> Do you know how I know the 1966 market
cap? Is this ringing any bells for you,
David?
>> No. So during the Buffett partnerships,
Warren Buffett saw that Disney was an
underpriced asset in 1966,
right before Walt died. So Buffett
bought a bunch of the stock in ' 66
since it had a market cap under $90
million at the time.
>> Under $90 million.
>> The company was doing 21 million in
pre-tax earnings. And at this point, cuz
this is after Disneyland, this after a
bunch of stuff, it had more cash than
debt.
>> Wow. This is like Ben Graham bargain
investing
>> and even more so like Charlie Mer
investing cuz it was a great business at
a great price.
>> Yeah. Wow.
>> A $90 million company doing 21 million
in pre-tax that has Disney's flywheel.
This is the buying opportunity of a
lifetime when Buffett bought it.
>> That's why he's the goat. [laughter]
>> He did, of course, sell it. So, right.
>> Well, that was the right move after
Walt's death, as we will see in a few
minutes.
>> Anyway, that's sort of how I would
characterize Walt's relationship with
wealth and sort of what his his goal was
in this personal services contract. This
whole thing ultimately becomes so
contentious that three board directors
actually resign from the public company.
There's also a shareholder lawsuit that
gets brought and for sort of strange
reasons, it doesn't end up going
through, but the remaining board members
end up approving it. Essentially, it was
Royy's way of saying, "Okay, the company
doesn't want to be too tied up in this
project if it fails, but we will provide
you a way to get more cash flows from
the company so you can figure out how to
do more of the funding of this thing
yourself."
>> Wow. Fascinating.
>> So, like just to reflect to to this
point in history, this is something I
really never realized. The origin of
Disneyland is, at least so far in the
story, not about the company
intentionally looking for more places to
put its intellectual property.
>> No, it's very intentionally not the
flywheel in the beginning.
>> Right. There are essentially zero
synergies as conceptualized so far for
Disneyland.
>> Yep. But all of that's about to change
because Disneyland,
even post all of the budget expansion
after SRRI and moving to Orange County
and 160 acres, is getting so out of hand
in its budget that it needs to actually
come back to the company.
>> Sort of.
>> Sort of. [laughter]
>> So, here's the corporate structure.
Originally, they thought they would need
about $5 million for the Anaheim
Disneyland. spoiler, they would go way,
way over that. But because they thought
it was going to be this expensive, Walt
went back to the company again and said,
"Look, I know we did this personal
services contract thing, but like I
think it's better if this is actually a
Disney thing, and let's figure out a way
to really tie it all together here." At
a $5 million price tag, the company
cannot afford to fund this. If you look
at 1952 when planning began, Walt Disney
Productions made less than half a
million dollars in net income. So 10
times that for the park's budget is is
is not going to fly. There's not cash
for it. But at this point, the company
is kind of like, all right, the
proverbial train is moving forward here.
There is actually a good plan to
integrate a whole bunch of Disney stuff
into the park. This can be a a Walt
Disney Productions thing in one way or
another. We're good for $500,000,
but we need to go find the bulk of the
$5 million somewhere else. Y
>> what can we do? So, in order to go get
the bulk of the financing for the park,
Walt comes back fully into the fold at
the Disney studio and does something
that no other movie executive is willing
to do at this point in time. He embraces
television. He goes to the TV networks
for money. Yeah. And the fascinating
thing is it's in part because they don't
really want a pure financial partner
for the park. Like they don't want to
just go raise a bunch of debt that
they'll then have to pay back. This has
hamstrung them so many times. They're
trying to think creatively of how can we
do like a 1 + 1 equals 5 thing here
where we have this Disneyland Inc. joint
venture and someone else is, you know,
building this thing and funding it. So
yeah, at the time the prevailing
sentiment in Hollywood was that TV was a
threat. That if Hollywood movie studios
started putting their content on TV, it
would steal audiences away from the
theaters. It's just like in our NFL
episode where baseball was deathly
afraid of television. I think the quote
was, "Radio wetss the appetite for
attending baseball games live and TV
satiates it."
>> Yes. But Walt realizes just like the NFL
did that TV actually was a huge new
opportunity. Walt says, "When television
first hit, I went back to New York and I
spent a week in New York just to study
television. I had the feeling then that
it was important and that we ought to
get in it." The feeling of the motion
picture business was that television was
something we should fight or we should
ignore it and maybe it would go away or
some darn thing. I said television is
going to be my way of going direct to
the public, bypassing the middleman. I
said, Roy, this television thing can be
the greatest thing because we will be
going direct to the public.
And he also thinks it might be his
ticket to financing the park. [laughter]
So ABC had been wanting to do something
with Walt. I mean, lobbying over and
over and over again. Uh because Walt did
this one special a few years before. I
think it was on NBC, not ABC. And it it
was great. Like there is something very
compelling about Walt Disney and Disney
stuff in a television special.
>> Yes. Yes. AUNCular Walt Disney
[laughter]
beaming into living rooms around
America.
>> But ABC is the third place network. They
don't have as many affiliates. They
don't have as much reach. If you're
going to get a partner for something
that you really want to take advantage
of the full reach of a television
network, it's not ABC.
>> You really want CBS or NBC.
>> Yes. And so Walt actually goes to CBS at
NBC with this pitch. I think it might be
Roy actually flying to New York and
doing this, but they're not interested
at least for the whole package that Walt
is proposing.
>> Yes. They both say, "Hey, Walt, we would
gladly do a regular television series
with you, but uh I don't know about this
park thing.
>> You're asking for the better part of $5
million so that we can build a theme
park with you and that's a bundled deal
with a doing a TV show. This is really
weird."
>> Yep. ABC though, Ben, as you were
saying, they're the newest of the
networks and they're struggling to catch
on. They need something like Disney and
Disneyland to break out. So they say,
"Yes, Walt's line on this was that ABC
needed the show so badly that they
bought the amusement park with it."
[laughter]
Do you know the structural thing with
the television industry that was going
on in 1952?
>> No. So, back in 1948, and I promise this
is related, back in 1948, the FCC paused
the ability to get a new broadcast
license while the FCC was sorting out
some technical and policy problems. It
was supposed to last like 6 to 12
months, but it ended up lasting 4 years
until 1952, a freeze on the ability to
get a new broadcast license. So, the
existing big four networks, which are
about to be three, NBC, CBS, and ABC,
became pretty entrenched. Meanwhile, the
number of households with TVs was
absolutely exploding. It went from 9% of
households in 1950 to 65%
just 5 years later in 1955.
[clears throat]
>> Yeah. So, all these networks now have a
basically governmentprotected oligopoly
>> accidentally
>> in this massive new market.
>> Yes. So if ABC could put on a hit show,
like there's not that many choices of
stuff to watch at any given time because
of this supply demand mismatch on on
content. Suddenly a giant swath of
Americans could pay attention instantly.
So they're like really hungry for super
compelling content. So Walt goes to ABC
kind of knowing this and knowing they're
in third place and says, "Okay, I will
make this show for you, but a you're
doing the park with me, and b I have
complete say on what happens during the
program, and I can change my mind
anytime, and there's no part of the
contract about what I'm making for you."
And ABC says, "Yes, absolutely. That
sounds fine, Mr. Disney."
>> Yes. So ABC ends up investing $500,000
in equity in Disneyland Inc. same terms
and amount as Disney Productions. In
addition though, they also guarantee
$4.5 million in bank loans. So boom,
there's the rest of the financing that
they think they need to get Disneyland
off the ground in debt guaranteed by
ABC. and they would televise the TV
show, but Walt Disney Productions would
have to produce it. But they're actually
buying a pretty expensive TV show also.
So in addition to this 500,000 and the
4.5 million, ABC is also going to pay $5
million per year to Walt Disney
Productions to make the show that
they're going to put on the air. And it
was ABC's to air for 7 years, which made
it the largest TV programming contract
in history.
>> Yes, this is an absolutely
over-the-top deal. There is one other
deal point which is uh ABC negotiated to
have the right to all the profits from
Disneyland's food and beverage for the
first decade. [laughter and gasps]
>> They're like, "Hey, we need something
else out of this."
>> Yes.
>> Yes. But a part of this contract that is
completely set in stone is the opening
date, July 17th, 1955. Interesting. I
didn't realize that the opening date was
set in this contract with ABC. Either
way, they do get the television show and
it works out to be a great deal for
everybody involved because Ben, to your
point about supply and demand, it
becomes a huge hit, like instantaneously
when it launches in the fall of 1954.
>> The content is basically a
behind-the-scenes look at all the
different lands and content for each.
So, Tomorrowland, Frontier Land,
Adventure Land, etc.
>> Yep. So, pretty quickly, Disneyland,
because of course they name the TV show
the same as the park.
>> Sure. I mean, if Walt gets to control
all the programming, like why not just
make it the most perfectly aligned
advertisement every week for a whole
year to get ready?
>> Yes. So, it quickly becomes the second
most popular show on television after I
Love Lucy, and it's the first ABC
program to crack the top 25 shows ever.
Like it was all NBC and CBS until
Disneyland.
>> Unbelievable. Also, ABC lets Disney run
trailers inside each episode for their
current theatrical release. So, it both
promotes Disneyland and the current
movie slate.
>> It it becomes a whole another no to the
flywheel.
>> Yes. And for the first time, they get
repeat exposure. I mean, Disney only
gets a touch point once every few years
with a consumer with a movie. And maybe
you watch their shorts. But with TV,
it's this way to build a repeated
relationship.
>> They had this in a certain way with the
comic strip before, but this is like
that on steroids.
>> Yes.
>> So, in that same fall and winter of 1954
into 1955,
the show has its first big like viral
moment even before the park opens. So,
in December of 1954,
Disney begins a threepart liveaction
miniseries on the show about the story
of Davy Crockett. Davy Crockett.
>> Oh, that's right.
>> And America goes nuts for Davy Crockett.
For listeners who don't know, Davy
Crockett is like a historical American
figure that fought and died in the
Battle of the Alamo in Texas, over a
century before this,
>> which Disney highly fictionalizes the
character.
>> Yes, totally. But this miniseries
becomes a massive flywheel moment for
Disney. Totally unintentionally. Davy
Crockett Coonkin caps become the
musthave kids product of 1955. They sell
10 million caps in 1955.
>> Unreal.
>> Even better, the theme song, The Ballad
of Davy Crockett, you know, King of the
Wild Frontier, reaches number one on the
Billboard charts in America and sells 7
million records. In total, Disney would
go on to do around $300 million of gross
sales of Davy Crockett merchandise,
which at this point they fully in-housed
commercial products. K. Cayman had
tragically passed away in a airplane
crash in 1949, after which they in-house
all of this within Disney. So, if all
that happened with the same splits we
mentioned before at 5% royalties on that
$300 million, assuming again 100% retail
markup from wholesale, that's $7.5
million
to Disney, [laughter]
which uh you know, I think is more in
actual
revenue to Disney than they had earned
from any film at that point in history.
And David, this is really going to blow
your mind. That is actually more than
the amount of income they had received
ever cumulatively from firstr run
animated features.
>> If you add up all the pluses and all the
minuses, by 1957,
>> the money they had made ever in profit
dollars from their first release films
was a hair over $7 million. [laughter]
And they made by your estimates seven
and a half million.
>> They made more from skin caps and
record sales than [laughter]
incredible. And what timing? Right
before Disneyland opens.
>> Insane.
>> Amazing.
>> Disney absolutely crushed the timing on
switching their horse to TV or sort of
embracing TV and embracing it in this
huge way. And not just with programming,
but directing all this attention at
Disneyland. We gave that stat earlier
all the way in the the 20s that the
average American went to theaters over
40 times. By 1947, that number was down
to about 32 times. And by 1956, the year
after Disneyland opened, it was down to
14 times per year. Thanks to our friend
Arvin at Worldly Partners for gathering
all this data.
>> So movie executives really had good
cause to be concerned about TV.
>> Absolutely. attention was shifting to
television and right as it was shifting
in droves, boom, that is right where
Disney showed up in this like
multiplicative way, you know.
>> Yeah, man. Incredible timing.
>> And Walt, as ever, had a quote on this.
This is from the special that he did
back in 1950 as an experiment. He said,
"I regard television as one of our most
important channels for the development
of a new motion picture audience.
Millions of tele viewers never go to a
picture theater and countless others
infrequently. In these highly
competitive days, we must use the
television screen along with every other
promotional medium to increase our
potential audience.
>> Man, was he right.
>> And it's just so incredible that because
he started playing with trains,
Disney became a major force in
television
and of course opened the park.
>> Yes. Okay. Okay. So, how does this all
come together? We've got this like joint
venture called Disneyland, Inc. It's got
$500,000 from Walt Disney Productions.
It's got $500,000 from ABC. It's got
$200,000 from Western Publishing, who
distributed their books. And then Walt
himself put in $250,000.
>> That's right. I did see that.
>> Yes.
>> And then they've got the $4.5 million of
debt guaranteed by ABC.
>> Exactly. So, there's a total of $6ish
million that they have to spend to build
the thing. Plus, there was actually
another 2 million of 10-year bonds that
ABC was committed to if they really
really needed an extra $2 million to
flex from a budget of six to a budget of
eight.
>> So, Ben, I've read a bunch of places
this ended up costing $17 million.
[laughter]
>> Yes, that is correct. So the cap table
is uh Walt Disney Productions and ABC
each own 34%, Western Publishing owns
14% and Walt himself personally owns 17%
and there's a contract between
Disneyland Inc. and Wed Enterprises
which Walt owns 100% of to actually
build it all. So all of this leads up to
July 17th, 1955,
the opening of Disneyland that would
change the company forever. that would
change American vacations forever. Yeah.
>> That would lay out a giant part of
Disney's business model going forward,
the opening of Disneyland.
>> Yes. But before we do that, now is a
great time to thank our friends at
Statsake.
>> Yes. So, Walt Disney had this idea that
he would often talk about plusing. Most
amusement parks would be effectively
complete at opening and then they'd call
it finished. But not Disneyland. Walt
treated the park as something that you
have to keep improving forever and he
constantly looked at how guests move
through it.
>> Yep. This idea though only works if you
can see what's happening. You can't
improve an experience on a hunch. What
mattered was how guests really behaved,
not what anyone assumed in a meeting,
which is largely the same problem that
product teams have today, just at speed
and scale. You can ship faster than ever
now, but the hard part becomes knowing
which changes actually improve the
product. And now coding with AI only
raises those stakes because LLMs are
non-deterministic, meaning that the same
input doesn't always produce the same
output. So a small change to a prompt or
model can have surprisingly large
downstream effects. Offline evals will
really only get you so far and you need
to be getting signals from real users
and making decisions on that.
>> And that's where stats comes in. They
offer product teams experimentation,
feature flags, and product analytics all
in one place. You can ship quickly, roll
out changes safely, and measure how
those changes impact users, making your
product actually better instead of just
guessing. Yes. So, just like Walt
continuously was plusing Disneyland
still today, Statig is how you improve
your product after you've shipped it.
You can learn more at
statsig.com/acquired
and just tell them that Ben and David
sent you. All right. So, the development
of the park, the team at WED had been
getting inspiration and sort of
concepting and iterating while all the
ABC stuff is happening, while all the
hype building around America is
happening, and of course, while the
financial negotiations are are
happening. So, in September of 1953, as
legend goes, Roy is about to walk into
meetings with television executives, and
Walt famously locks himself in a room
with Herb Ryman for an entire weekend
and says, "Herb, can you draw the first
full drawing of Disneyland?" And Herb
looks at him and he's like, "Dis what?"
The first time hearing of this and he's
like, "The theme park, you're going to
come work on that with me." And he's
like, "I don't even work here. I I used
to work at Disney, but I I don't work
here now. And Walt was like, "Yeah, but
you're the guy to do this." And so Herb
kind of looks at him. He says, "Can you
tell me a little bit more about this
theme park?" Walt,
this is metaphorical, kind of locks the
door.
>> Yeah. He's like, "Great. I will stay
here all weekend with you and tell you
about the theme park."
>> And out of the weekend emerges this
beautiful drawing that we will send out
in the email acquire.fm/e FM/AL that
they can use as a sales tool for the
first meeting with ABC. You've got a
castle, you've got mountains, you've got
the railroad, you've got the river. The
bones are all there.
>> The core vision of what Disneyland is.
>> Yes. Yes. Other Wed employees,
meanwhile, start traveling all over the
US looking at the best existing theme
parks. Walt and others travel overseas
to places like Tivoli Gardens and
Copenhagen to get sort of a a completely
different take on how they could do a
park with green space, much more
pleasant, less carnival-like, safer,
kind of a less seedy experience than you
are getting in theme parks in the US.
That is the goal. So, this year leading
up to the park, what we were about to
describe is completely insane. Remember
I said that the date was fixed in the
television deal in part because the TV
show was going to culminate in a live
broadcast of the actual park opening and
there was all sorts of like brand new
technology and logistics and operations
that ABC was going to bring to bear for
that. So they were they were planning
around that
>> and there are some sources that say that
it was 366 days to build the park. If
you actually look at physical
construction, it was less than that. 11
months. Wow. So, they end up building
Disneyland in onethird the time that it
took to make Snow White. Incredible.
This whole thing sounds like a fever
dream when you describe it. A main
street reflecting how Walt pictured the
ideal small town from his childhood.
Multiple rivers with different types of
boats. There's going to be multiple
rivers. Robotic animals coming out of
the water on the Jungle Cruise. a
castle. American Indians performing live
shows of dances. Cars that kids, like
three-year-old kids, can drive around
and crash into stuff.
>> Still my favorite part of Disneyland.
>> Yes. Autotopia.
>> An intense amount of greenery and trees
that all had to be brought in. I mean,
they're doing pine trees and they're
doing palm trees. Absolutely exquisite
landscaping to reinforce how pleasant
and safe of a place that it was. A
passenger train built from scratch on
real railroad ties that had to be laid
down. This thing is like Walt's
feverdream reflection of America all in
the most idealized, safe, clean, cheery
way possible. They've got the past,
they've got the future with Tomorrowland
and Frontier Land and Adventure Land,
but no sign of the present. So, you can
be completely immersed and disconnected
from your day-to-day troubles.
>> You know what? I actually never realized
that that Disneyland is 100% about the
past and the future and 0% about the
present
>> and about the fantasy. You can go to
fantasy land. That's your other option
if you don't want the past or the
future.
>> So, the first part of construction is
the 20 foot high burm insulating all of
Disneyland from the outside world with
the Disneyland Railroad sitting right at
top it. To this day, I think the most
impressive thing about Disneyland is the
sightelines. Yeah. Despite several very
very different environments on a
relatively small plot of land, I mean
from Star Wars today to Frontier Land,
Adventure Land, Tomorrowland, Main
Street, you really only ever see what
the imagineers want you to. And it
creates that unique experience where
Main Street can feel nostalgic and
wholly different than the jungle over at
Adventureland and very, very different
than the strip mall mania happening just
a few acres away on any side of you.
>> Yep. I'll just keep going on the
insanity of building this thing. There
wasn't yet any on-site buildings to
fabricate the rides. So, they did
construction at Burbank.
>> That's right. And they trucked it all
down.
>> That's a 50minute drive if you don't hit
traffic. And the highway was still being
built. So, it's all on surface streets.
It's crazy. Think of the scale of the
stuff that they were building.
>> Yep.
>> Halfway through construction, they
discover that Rivers of America almost
doesn't work at all. when they filled it
with water, the water just drained into
the dirt underneath. And David, as you
mentioned, cost ballooned from the
original 5 million to a total of 17
million. But that's actually pretty
cheap.
>> Totally.
>> I I did the inflation math. That's $210
million today. You absolutely could not
build anything remotely close to
Disneyland today for $200 million or in
a single year. It
>> is astounding how it all got built. Also
very very convenient for Disney that
they sold a lot of Coonkin caps as the
budget was ballooning. [laughter]
>> Yes. And found sponsors to sponsor lands
and rides and drew on every ounce of
debt they could.
>> Yes. This is the other just like
absolute galaxy brain Walt addition to
the flywheel that he brings in with the
parks. Corporate sponsorships.
>> Yes.
>> There were 65 corporate sponsors in
Disneyland within the first few years of
it opening. So, at opening there was
Richfield Auto for Autotopia, Bank of
America, of course they had to be there,
a sponsor of Fantasy Land, Coca-Cola as
well.
>> You won't believe this. In addition to
Coca-Cola, Pepsi, they had a sponsorship
in Frontier Land. Coke actually didn't
become the exclusive uh supplier sponsor
until 1990.
>> Yeah, that's right.
>> American Motors, Santa Fe Railway, TWWA
for the rocket to the moon, Monsanto was
actually a sponsor.
>> That's right. Carnation, Kodak, the list
goes on. But I I do have one favorite,
David.
>> The National Rifle Association.
[laughter]
>> Wow. Frontier Land. [gasps]
>> Yes. Inside the Davy Crockett Museum,
there was a shooting gallery. There you
go.
>> And it's unclear from the historical
records if it is technically a
sponsorship, but the rifles were
provided by the NRA. Like real rifles.
>> There you go. Flywheel in action.
>> Yes. [laughter]
So, I was trying to do some comparison
on this 17 million inflation adjusted to
210 million. The Rise of the Resistance
Star Wars ride that they built in 2019,
which is excellent if you've never been
on it, was rumored to cost anywhere from
200 million to$450 million for just one
ride.
>> Right. And they built the whole park for
less than that.
>> Yes, [laughter] man. The things you
could do back then.
>> Yes. Right. I mean, uh, permitting was
pretty light back then. So, we get to
opening day. How's it go? Well, less
than half of the planned rides were
open. And, uh, just to give you a sense
of how down to the wire it came, Walt
personally put on a mask and was helping
to paint the 20,000 Leagues Under the
Sea exhibit the day before it opened.
Opening day comes, it's nearly 100° in
the middle of July in Southern
California. that created issues with the
newly poured asphalt and there are
legends of women's high heels sinking
into the asphalt because of [laughter]
that. There are water fountains,
but they don't yet have the plumbing
finished to turn on. So, if you want
something to drink in this 100° heat,
you can go buy a Pepsi.
>> Exactly.
>> The restaurants ran out of food. Rides
were breaking down. Mr. Toad's Wild Ride
went down because it was too much for
the power grid. and the Mark Twain
riverboat began to sink since the
operator let 500 people onto it, which
was double the 250 that he was supposed
to. But despite all of this, it is a
giant giant hit. That first day that was
technically a preview day for press and
invited guests, 15,000 people were
invited, but it is believed that 30,000
attended.
>> And then that was in person.
>> Yes.
>> Then there's the TV show. So ABC rolls
in with 22 live TV cameras and a giant
crew to operate it all with 1955
technology. The viewership numbers are
astonishing. It was the world's largest
live telecast ever. 83 million people
tuned in to watch from home, which means
that nearly half of America watched this
broadcast,
>> watched this 90minute commercial,
[laughter]
>> right? Yes.
>> And it's it's crazy, right? It's live
coverage of this like Wackadoo amusement
park opening. On the one hand, why would
you want to watch that? On the other
hand, you've been conditioned over the
last year by one of the most popular
televisions programs in America that
this is going to be a giant deal, so you
better be watching when it happens.
>> Do you know I'm sure you do, but do you
know who the three anchors were that ABC
hired to do the opening?
>> One was Ronald Reagan, right?
>> Ronald Reagan is the big one. Art
Linklator, Bob Cummings, and future
president of the United States of
America, Ronald Reagan.
>> It's crazy that the TV strategy just
absolutely knocked it out of the park.
What does half of America tune into
anymore? I mean, ever.
>> Yeah. I mean, even the Super Bowl today,
which is the biggest television event in
America, only gets about 40% of US
households tuning in. And this was just
to watch guys talk about what's going on
behind them in an amusement park.
>> No, I think it was that America had been
primed via the TV show for the whole
past year that this was going to be the
event of 1955.
>> Yeah. So cool. By the end of the first
week, there was 160,000 visitors. Two
months after opening, the millionth
visitor walked in. And in the first
year, there had been 3.6 6 million
visitors.
>> You have in the second year of the
park's operation, it does over 4 million
visitors, which makes it more popular
than both the Grand Canyon and
Yellowstone National Park. It's like the
most popular park in America is now
Disneyland.
>> And today, the park has over 900 million
visitors since opening day.
>> My favorite little bit of trivia about
Disneyland was learning about the
original business model. So, you used to
have to pay to get on the rides.
>> You would pay, I think it was a dollar
for admission to the park,
>> and then you could buy booklets of
tickets that would get you admission to
the various rides and attractions and
different rides and attractions would
have different ticket grades and would
be priced differently. It was this whole
complicated business model that they
obviously have drastically simplified
since and raised prices astronomically.
Yes, absolutely. And I mean the the
biggest sort of success of the whole
thing is it just couldn't be farther
from a carnival or fairground. And that
turned out to be a great great business.
Yes. Harrison Price, who led the
research at SRRI for Disneyland, said
Disney's rethinking of the American
amusement park had striking and
immediate business consequences. Because
his park was such a pleasant place,
people stayed there longer, and because
they stayed longer, they spent more
time. Basically, Price said he tripled
per capita expenditures because he
tripled time.
>> And then, of course, you know, fast
forward to today at Disneyland or Disney
World.
>> You go for like 14 hours.
>> Yeah. Right. Per day. I mean, you you're
not going there for just a day. You're
going there for multiple days, right?
>> You're making a whole trip out of it.
>> And if you're going to Disney World,
then you're there a whole week.
>> Y
>> So, I I promise we won't do too much
part two foreshadowing on this episode,
but this is just one point I got to
drive home. Disney parks and cruises
today does $ 36 billion in revenue and
$10 billion in profit per year. That is
twice the amount of profit that their
entertainment division produces.
>> Yeah. Also just wild to think about
physical amusement parks having
essentially a 30% net income margin.
[laughter]
>> What other physical park operator is
going to operate with those kind of
margins? And the fact that it's a bigger
business for Disney than their movies.
Yes. Like twice as big of a business.
And this is, you know, there's 160 acres
in California. There's a big swath of
land in Florida. There's five or six of
them around the world. There's some
cruise ships. And that spits off more
profit, twice as much profit than all of
the other Disney things you can
experience anywhere, anytime.
>> Well, we're gonna get into this in a
minute here. Really, the impressive
thing is that Disney films are now great
again, and still the parks do more
revenue. We're about to hit a period
where the parks do a lot more net income
than the films because the films suck.
Now, reflecting on all this, Disneyland
actually was not a bet the company move
for Walt Disney Productions financially.
It was cleverly structured by Roy to not
be,
>> but reputationally it absolutely was. I
mean, people were willing to take these
giant leaps on Walt because of who he
was and what he had accomplished the
same way that they do with Elon or Steve
Jobs or Warren Buffett getting deals
that no one else could get. So Roy was
like great at making sure it wouldn't
financially bankrupt the company. But
Walt was sort of betting that reputation
extremely publicly to half the
households in the US. So not only was he
betting the company, he was betting his
own personal fortune, too. Remember that
$250,000 that he put in? He sold his
vacation house in Palm Springs. He
borrowed $100,000 against his life
insurance and he took on a personal loan
to fund that obligation.
>> Yep. All true and all necessary because
of how they had always operated the
company. He wasn't taking lots of cash
out of the company
>> until the sort of renegotiation of his
employment contract.
>> Yep.
>> So, there is a fascinating kod to all
this crazy corporate stuff on how the
park was formed. You might be wondering,
well, wait, doesn't the Walt Disney
Company own the park outright now? I
mean, when you visit Disneyland, don't
you assume, hey, wait, this is just part
of Disney. What about that weird joint
venture thing and ABC and Walt
personally? So, here's how it all goes
down. The headline is the Walt Disney
Company would not actually own the park
and everything within its borders for a
full 27 years after opening in 1982.
So here's the the full story of who sold
what and when. Pretty quickly, Walt
Disney Productions exercised their right
to buy out Western Publishing and Walt
personally. So by 1958, 3 years after
opening, they owned 66%.
But the buyout right to ABC stake, that
wasn't pre-negotiated. M
>> so in 1960 when the company actually had
enough cash to do it that's when Roy
negotiated hey we'll pay you $7.5
million to buy out your your stake so by
1960 the publicly traded company Walt
Disney Productions did own all of
Disneyland Inc. But that leaves Wed
Enterprises which had been hired as a
contractor to build all the stuff.
>> Yes. And Wed Enterprises is Imagineering
today. Disney Imagineering.
>> Yes. But Wed Enterprises, the entity at
this point in time, also owned rights to
some elements in the park,
>> right? And it wasn't consolidated into
Disney, the company yet, right? It was
still this separate thing owned by Walt,
>> right? So Wed, which Walt is the 100%
shareholder of, actually owned the
railroad outright. It had been
negotiated.
>> Of course, he did [laughter]
>> as a part of the personal services
contract because it was like, hey, I was
already doing this side project and now
I'm just putting it on Disneyland.
[laughter]
>> It all comes back to trains.
>> So, he got ticket revenue from it as an
annuity basically.
>> Right. Cuz all the rides cost money. So,
the the railroad at Disneyland,
>> yes,
>> was Walts.
>> Same thing with the Montreal. These were
not owned by Disneyland Inc., they were
owned by Wed.
>> Amazing. We also mentioned since Wed was
Walt's personal company, it owned Walt's
name and likeness, which led to that 10%
royalty on merchandise.
>> In 1963, 8 years after the park opened,
Roy was getting very nervous that the
public shareholders would sue over this
admittedly very tenuous structure. So,
they reached a deal. Wed would get
sliced into two pieces. Imagineering,
the architectural engineering
department, and everything else. Disney
Productions would buy the half of Wed
that was Imagineering. So they finally
in-house Imagineering in 1965. The rest
of the holdings would be renamed Rhett
Law, which is Walter backwards.
>> Right. Right.
>> And inside of Rhettaw, Walt would get to
keep the trains, the Montreal, and his
10% royalty. This is in 1965.
that would actually last all the way
until 1982, nearly three decades after
the opening, where the company says
enough is enough. Goes to Walt's family,
cuz this was after he passed away, and
they bought out the name rights, the
Montreal, and the railroad in exchange
for $43 million of Disney stock.
Insanely Wed Enterprises, which would
later be Rhett Law, got a total of $75
million in checks from Walt Disney
Productions for the Disneyland Railroad
and for the Montreal between 1953 and
1981 and another 46 million for name
royalties.
>> Wow. So, I guess the question as a
Disney shareholder would have been, was
it worth it,
>> right?
>> And the obvious answer is yes. I mean,
there's all these conflicts of interest
everywhere, and this would never fly
today with sort of modern shareholder
and SEC and securities laws, but in
practice, if you were a Disneyland
shareholder then and you held through
all of this, that worked out great for
you.
>> Well, speaking of how great it would
have worked out for you after the launch
of the TV show, the park, the company is
just firing on all cylinders again. and
Disneyland. The combination of the
television show and the park have really
added a fifth element to the flywheel
business model. That's right. You've got
one, compelling great IP. Two, maximize
distribution in the core vehicle. Three,
feed the IP into as many ancillary
vehicles as possible. Four, you've got
the re-releases in the vault. And now
five, parks and television. This is uh
television to amplify interest in all of
the characters. You've got parks to do
almost like the extreme bottom of
funnel. The way to experience the most
Disney thing you possibly could
experience every once in a while, but a
huge monetization event. And of course,
you do that. I I mean, I just got back
from Disneyland. Guess what? We're
watching a lot of Toy Story this week at
my house. It's a refresher on your
fandom. Thinking about it more now,
television was adding another node to
the flywheel for sure. The parks are
almost this like hybrid flywheel plus IP
because all the core Disney IP of course
goes into the parks. I mean, you've got
the Peter Pan ride, you've got the Star
Wars rides today, but the parks are also
not just a destination,
>> right? They're a source of IP
development, not just a a sync of IP
development.
>> And I mean, this would literally become
true with Pirates of the Caribbean much
later.
>> I mean, that's got to have grossed
billions after all these sequels.
>> You actually have new IP generation
coming out of Imagineering and the
parks,
>> right? A lot of stuff hasn't done as
well. Like Haunted Mansion has never
really worked as Jungle Cruise. But
yeah, that that is a great point that
the parks serve as a way to feed the
rest of the flywheel, not just be a sink
of it. So this year 1955 with the park
with TB revenue from Davy Crockett,
Mickey Mouse Club, this is basically the
inflection point for the company.
Revenue doubled from 54 to 55 and it
would just keep on climbing for decades
from this point forward. Disney
effectively stops being a movie studio
and it becomes this new form of
diversified
stable entertainment company.
>> Yes. In November of 1957, Disney finally
lists its stock on the New York Stock
Exchange. Stock had obviously been held
by the public ever since the 1940 stock
offering, but it wasn't listed and
traded on the New York Stock Exchange
until 1957. Interestingly, post IPO,
Walt and Roy do still effectively
control the company. 47% of the voting
power of the company is held by the
Disney Voting Trust.
>> And so, you just don't need that many
other shareholders for your votes to
carry the day. Y
>> So, even as a public company, it was
still their sort of family company.
>> Y
>> for a little bit, that would sort of
wayne over the decades from here.
>> Yep. Once the company's listed publicly
and people start to realize the
incredible power of the business behind
Disney, in early 1958, the Wall Street
Journal runs a front page story about
Disney's unique business model. And this
was one of the most fun things to
discover in our research. So the
article's title is Disney's land, Walt's
profit formula, dream, diversify, and
never miss an angle. And this article in
the Wall Street Journal is where the
famous Disney flywheel illustration
comes from that Ben, you are holding up
live that you have framed in your
studio.
>> This has been on the wall of my office
for years. So, the legend that's out
there that everybody believes is that
this was a napkin sketch that Walt
himself drew. No, it was actually
created by a Disney studio artist as an
illustration for this Wall Street
Journal piece. Disney confirmed this for
us when we were visiting them in the
archives. And then we asked the Wall
Street Journal to pull the original
piece out of their archives. We'll link
to it in the show notes. So cool that
this is the origin of where it all came
from.
>> Yeah, it it serves as an illustration
for something that at the time was
actually a pretty difficult to
articulate concept of a business
flywheel. I will say the word flywheel
never appears in the Wall Street Journal
article.
>> No, that nomenclature would get added
later,
>> but it was like the journal saying, "Hey
Disney, help us with some kind of
illustration that makes this point that
you have a wholly unique new business
model in the media landscape."
>> And it's a beautiful, beautiful diagram.
The whole article is great. Roy has
these amazing quotes within it. He says,
"Our diversified activities are related
and tend to complement each other,
helping us to do relatively fine
business in the face of otherwise
difficult times for the motion picture
industry. Integration is the key word
around here. We don't do anything in one
line without giving a thought to its
likely profitability in our other
lines."
so spot-on. And then they walk through
the steps of the company's flywheel with
their plans for their upcoming feature
film release of Sleeping Beauty, which
was still a year away from release at
the time of the article. In 1958, how
crazy is this? At Disneyland, which
opens in 1955, there is the centerpiece
of the whole thing is Sleeping Beauty
Castle. That movie wouldn't come out for
another four years, right? They were
building hype for a movie that was
basically in pre-production at this
point.
>> In fact, it was based on concept art
that was effectively a German castle cuz
it was so far from the film.
>> Yes. Incredible. So, the article walks
through at Disneyland, they've installed
animated diaramas as an attraction that
they're charging a 35 cent admission fee
for. These are animated diaramas of
Sleeping Beauty, the upcoming movie.
Next, Disney is producing and selling
Princess Aurora dolls and costumes.
They're working on producing and
publishing books of the Disney version
of the fable that will be told in the
movie. Of course, they are. And of
course, there are segments in the
Disneyland TV show about Sleeping
Beauty. They're already preparing the
soundtrack album to go on sale before
the movie's released. And then finally,
comics of Aurora and The Sleeping Beauty
Story are already starting to come out
as part of the Disney Treasury of
Classic Tales syndicated comic strip.
>> Fascinating.
>> Just amazing.
>> The other thing this article reveals is
that Disney was intentionally making its
TV shows in color even when TVs were
still black and white because they
thought it was likely TVs would go color
soon and they knew that the IP they were
making would stay valuable for decades.
I mean the foresight they are so bought
in on we just dumping valuable IP onto
the pile and we want it to live forever.
>> Yep. Now there is one other thing we
haven't talked about which is that
Disney in-housed their own film
distribution right before the launch of
Disneyland.
>> Yes. Yeah. And this actually comes up in
that journal article too.
>> Yep. They create something called Buena
Vista Distribution and they left RKO
Radio Pictures who had been their
distributor since I think 1936.
Howard Hughes ended up owning it and it
had been kind of a train wreck as he
spiraled out of control toward the end
of his life. Disney didn't really want
to be a part of that chaos. And at the
same time, Walt had really started
thinking about Disney as vertically
integrated entertainment, not just a
film studio who would rely on others for
distribution. So in 53, 2 years before
Disneyland opened, they incorporated
Buenav Vista, The Living Desert was
their first films, one of these nature
documentaries.
>> Mhm. Then quickly thereafter, they did
Lady in the and 20,000 Leagues
Under the Seas distribution through
Buenav Vista instead of through an
outside distributor. It was kind of like
a test like can we pull this off?
>> They got pretty good at it pretty fast
with the exception of international
where they then had to rely on
subdistributors for a long time. But
Disney had become such a household name,
especially because of that weekly ABC
show and because of Disneyland, where
they were pretty uniquely well suited to
actually self-distribute without a
middleman. I mean, this is like Walt's
dream from the early cartooning days.
>> It's kind of surprising that they didn't
start doing it after Snow White. I mean,
who's going to turn down a Disney
picture?
>> All right, you te me right up cuz I was
wondering the same thing. Cash flow.
>> M. You can't distribute
them before you actually get paid by the
theaters when tickets.
>> So Disney didn't have the working
capital to pull this off until their
real strength in the mid-50s.
>> That's such a good point. I always had
wondered why more studios didn't
vertically integrate and own their own
distribution. And that makes sense. You
need a lot of working capital to do so.
It's exactly right. In the long run,
it's a pretty amazing strategy since
they'd been paying I don't know what is
it about a third of the total rentals to
another distributor. And especially with
these re-releases.
>> Yeah, it's an absolute no-brainer with
the re-releases. At this point,
Disneyland plus the merchant licensing
provides this really stable foundation.
They almost like replatformed the
business is what one way you could put
it where it's the same like spiritual
entity, but instead of the business
being in the films, they now have the
business in this stable foundation and
they do the films to like add new stuff
to the pile, but the platform itself is
Disneyland, TV, and merch and and
licensing. So then a few years later in
1961, Walt Disney Productions after 22
years of being in debt to Bank of
America finally paid off their last
loan.
>> Roy must have been so happy on that day
[laughter]
and Walt was already scheming how to
blow some more money. [laughter]
>> Yes. So one thing we foreshadowed is is
Sleeping Beauty. We talked about
Sleeping Beauty Castle. You might be
wondering what ended up happening with
the film. This, like many of the other
films we talked about, did not recoup
costs. I mean, since then, it's done
phenomenally well and made probably
hundreds of millions of dollars in
cumulative profit for Disney, but did
not pay back at the box office.
>> Mhm. Part of that was it had a really
high production cost, right? After all
the success of Disneyland and all the
bihooing about the flywheel and
everything in the Wall Street Journal
article, I mean, they're building around
it.
>> Whole hog on this one.
>> Yeah. They spent $6 million making it.
It was the most expensive to produce to
date.
>> Yep.
>> But yeah, I mean, Walt was pretty
distracted with Disneyland, so he wasn't
that kind of authoritative voice to help
the team find the great story in there.
But yeah, if if it wasn't such an
extravagantly detailed animation piece,
then it probably would have been
profitable.
>> And hey, given the company's business
model, they're happy to play the long
game,
>> right? So the weird thing is the
financial blip that happens in this year
1959. Everything is true about this
really stable platform. But if you look
at that year, the financial year 1960,
the company actually shows a loss. Like
they flip briefly from looking
increasingly profitable to suddenly net
income negative because Sleeping Beauty
had that hole.
>> Mhm.
>> ABC canceled Zoro and Mickey Mouse Club,
which were both TV shows that Disney was
making, which was related to Walt Disney
Productions blowing up the Disneyland
deal. and saying, "You guys are kind of
difficult to work with now. We want to
buy you out of Disneyland." And ABC's
like, "All right, then we're gonna stop
paying you huge sums for your TV shows
and giving you all this free marketing."
So that relationship ended there, at
least for
>> for the moment. ABC would come back in
the beginning.
>> Yes. But the takeaway is the company is
actually financially stable now. That
this is okay.
>> Yeah. The last time that Walt and the
company bet big on investing in
production ahead of revenues was 1940
with the move to Burbank and having
Pinocchio and Fantasia and Bambi in
production all at once.
>> Any one of those almost killed the
company on their own.
>> Yeah. Now though, post Disneyland,
they've got this stable base that they
can take these big swings.
>> Yeah. Merchant licensing taught them to
crawl and then they they walked and ran
with Disneyland in terms of that that
stable platform. Just to illustrate this
bounceback point, here's the trend.
1957, they do $3.6 million in net
income. Then the next year, 3.9. Then
the next year, 3.4. Then, ah, 1960
happens. That perfect storm of badness,
$1.3 million loss. Then they bop right
back. 1961, 4.5, then 5.2, then 6.5,
then 7, then 11, then 12. I mean, they
just stability.
>> Mhm.
And then Walt decided that it was too
stable [laughter]
and he needed to blow it all up again or
at least he wanted to. So he starts
wondering how can I bet it all again and
in a bigger way, right? Is Disney land
like is a theme park going to really be
my legacy? Are these animated films
really going to be my legacy? I
shouldn't I do something actually
meaningful to the world?
>> Yes. I mean, this this idea of a
physical Disney location
worked really well. But what if we don't
stop at an amusement park, what if the
next time we build an entire city?
Maybe like an experimental
prototype community of tomorrow, you
know, Epcot. [laughter]
And if you think you know what we're
talking about because you've been to
Epcot, that's not it.
>> That's not what we're talking about.
>> That's a theme park named Epcot. But
Walt had this insane insane vision that
never got built, but got pretty far
along in the process for
again a fever dream. Not just of a place
that you go for a day, but a place where
you live and you work and you are
transported and futuristic transport
mechanisms and all the most innovative
companies locate their innovation
centers all in in one place together and
there's this beautiful tower in the
center of it. I mean, this is the ideal
future. So this was Walt's final
project, the Florida project that never
got built as you say. And I think
it all kind of stems back to Burbank
>> and that brief moment before the strike
when the studio at Burbank really was
this utopian physical place that was the
perfect marriage of art and commerce. I
really think that that's what Walt
always wanted to realize in the world.
And now after the success of Disneyland,
his ambition is restored
and he wants to build it in this city.
>> To my mind, the most interesting part
about this is how far it got.
>> Yes. Yes. Yes. So the way that Walt
starts working towards realizing this
vision is the 1964 World's Fair in New
York. So Walt gets this great idea
leading up to the fair that Disney on
the success that they have at Disneyland
can partner with other big American
companies and institutions
to create Disney sponsored pavilions and
exhibitions at the fair that they can
then transfer into Disneyland. But even
more than that, the New York World's
Fair can serve as this sort of
undercover test bed for this big idea of
an East Coast city that will be a
partnership between American industry,
Disney, and the public. So, the four
exhibitions that they create for the
1964 World's Fair, many of which should
probably sound familiar to you, It's a
Small World, sponsored by Pepsi and
UNICEF, which is actually designed by
Mary Blair, who's this famous designer.
She brought modernism to Disney. She's
the one that basically did all the
concept art for Alice in Wonderland,
which is why it looks the way that it
does. She's kind of responsible for that
aesthetic. And she was one of the
original team members of Imagineers that
came over from Wed and I believe the
first female Imagineer.
>> That's right. That's right. And then
she's the one who does Small World.
>> Yep. By far the most successful pavilion
at the fair that makes its way to
Disneyland. So that's one. Two, the
Carousel of Progress sponsored by
General Electric. Three, the Magic
Skyway sponsored by Ford. And then four,
Great Moments with Mr. Lincoln sponsored
by the state of Illinois and that last
one of which
>> catch that
>> is how Disney Imagineering develops
audio animatronics
>> for Abraham Lincoln.
>> Yes. This whole thing is this amazing
test bed for audio animatronics which
Disney kind of invents and then
popularizes in Disneyland and then in
Disney World.
>> Yeah. And because it's Disney and part
of Disneyland, we think, oh yeah, audio
animatronics like Disneyland like these
are robots, [laughter]
>> right? that Disney Imagineering is
inventing in the late 50s, early 60s.
>> Well, David, you you and I have had the
privilege of being at some pretty cool
robotics conferences and you meet these
like PhD researchers who are sort of in
and out of Disney. Like that is still
where a lot of cutting edge robotics
happens.
>> Yes. So, all four of those rides after
the fair get ported right over to
Disneyland because of course
>> three of the four
>> the Ford one does not. The part of the
deal is that Walt says, "You have to pay
a million dollars to use my name as a
part of your attraction." Of course, in
addition to footing the bill for
building it, but I'll forgive that
million dollars if you let us put it in
Disneyland afterwards because we want to
get some value of it out after the fair.
And Ford says, "We'll just pay the
million." [laughter]
>> Poor decision on Ford's part.
>> I know.
>> Okay. So, three of the four get ported
over to Disneyland, but all of it leads
right into planning for the Florida
Project.
>> And I think while the Florida Project
initially is not a theme park, and Walt
very much is uninterested in building an
East Coast Disneyland, he says it
explicitly over and over again. He does
have a nagging concern that an east
coast audience is more sophisticated
than a west coast audience and there
isn't demand for a theme park like
Disneyland in Florida. And I always
think he uses that as kind of his like
emotional defense mechanism air cover
for why he's like, "Oh, I don't want to
just do the same thing again." I think
it's like I'm afraid it'll fail. And one
of the big takeaways from the World's
Fair is no, people would absolutely love
a Disneyland type thing, especially with
audio animatronics and all this cool new
technology you're developing for the
World's Fair.
>> Well, obviously if Disney is going to do
anything on the East Coast, it should be
in Florida. I mean, it has the warmest
yearround weather and even more
important,
>> abundant cheap land.
>> Abundant cheap land all throughout the
state.
>> Yep. So, Walt though, like you said, had
no interest in just building another
Disneyland. So, what is this Florida
project? I had heard about this lore and
legend over the years before doing the
research, but diving in, it blew my
mind, and it will blow yours, too,
hearing about what Walt's vision for it
was,
>> the ambition. So, one, it starts with a
brand new airport of the future paired
together with a vast entrance complex
and park. Two, there will of course be a
theme park, a new Disney World Magic
Kingdom theme park that was initially
intended to be five times the size of
Disneyland just for just for the theme
park. Three, a 1,000 acre industrial
park intended to house satellite R&D
offices for America's greatest
companies. Think everybody that Walt is
partnering with at the World's Fair.
Ford, GE, Pepsi, all the companies that
are corporate sponsors back at
Disneyland. He wants them
>> Yeah, Monsanto m move their most
advanced R&D teams to this new city in
Florida. And then four, most important,
the heart of the whole project is Epcot.
But again, not the Epcot you know today.
So Walt Epcot was going to be in his own
words a living blueprint of the future
where people actually live a life they
can't find anywhere else in the world. A
showcase to the world for the ingenuity
and imagination of American free
enterprise. And basically
it is a sci-fi city.
>> Meanwhile, I gotta say they couldn't
open most of Tomorrowland for 1955 when
they opened Disneyland and they're
having a really hard time keeping up
with the pace of technology. I walk
through Tomorrowland even today and I'm
like this all feels really dated and
nothing like tomorrow. I think Walt
himself has a famous quip on this which
is tomorrow comes a lot faster into
today than we can kind of keep up with.
So you could imagine if they actually
built this thing, it it very quickly
would would not feel like the future. I
mean, you plow a bunch of capex into
concrete and futuristic concepts. New
stuff gets invented real fast and then
it's ugly and old.
>> That's a good point. But perhaps you
haven't heard the vision for what this
city is yet.
>> Please, please lay [laughter] it on me.
>> Okay. It will have a radical radial
design plan. So, the city itself is
going to fan out like spokes on a wheel
from a domed central downtown hub. Yes,
you did hear that right. A 50 acre
enclosed climate controlled
fully domed central downtown city
that will have no surface streets, fully
pedestrian walkways,
>> Montreals. Well, yeah. Yes. The the only
motorized forms of transportation will
be Montreals and this new concept of
people movers. And then below ground,
there will be a vast network of tunnels,
a multi-layered tunnels underneath the
ground for cars and industrial vehicles
to circulate throughout the city. On the
edge of this downtown dome, there'll be
highdensity apartment buildings.
Surrounding that, there is a vast green
belt of parks and recreation facilities.
And then finally, in the outer ring of
the city is lowdensity single family
home neighborhoods. And the plan is that
20,000 people will live here in this
city with full self-governing
infrastructure. So, schools, public
services, everything. And it is all
going to be founded as a new city in the
state of Florida. This is unreal.
[laughter]
>> Self-governing,
but in a special district carved out and
controlled
lawfully by the Walt Disney Company.
>> I mean, it sort of sounds like a I don't
know if it's a utopian or a dystopian
film or both. [laughter]
Yeah, it's definitely ambitious. So on
November 15th, 1965,
Walt along with Roy and the then
governor of Florida, Hayden Burns, hold
a press conference where they announced
that Disney has been buying land in
Central Florida
>> under various uh subsidiaries and
obscured names so no one would catch on
to what they're doing.
>> Yep. and that a very large new Disney
project will be coming to the state.
That planning has already begun and they
will be seeking public approvals.
>> They bought 27,000 acres. That is the
size of San Francisco.
>> Yes. Yes. Twice the size of Manhattan.
Uh it's almost 40 square miles that they
have purchased in the middle of Florida.
and it's all swamp land right now. It's
uninhabitable. And so in May of 1966, so
a few months later, they get government
approval to drain the swamp and prepare
to build Walt's vision. Let's go.
[laughter]
[gasps]
[sighs]
If only. So, in late October of 1966,
Walt records a film of a pitch, the full
reveal for the Epcot Vision. We'll link
to it in the show notes. You should
absolutely go watch this movie. It is
the second to last recorded appearance
that Walt makes in his life, and he has
no idea. The last one, I think, is a day
or two later. and he ends the video
with, "Speaking for myself and for the
entire Disney organization, we're ready
to go right now." Unfortunately, [sighs]
he dies
about 2 months later. His death is both
incredibly fast, incredibly unexpected,
and of course kind of a slow motion
disaster that's been brewing his whole
life ever since he started chain smoking
in France when he was 17 years old.
>> I mean, he was notorious for his hacking
cough. That is how people knew that he
was approaching if you were in a
building on the Burbank campus.
>> Yeah. You'd hear him hacking. So that
summer in 1966, Walt had started
experiencing pains in his body. He
assumes that it's all the stress from,
you know, all these new projects that
he's working on, or maybe it's old polo
injuries that he has, or maybe it's this
nagging cough, but obviously it's cancer
eating away at him. Finally, in November
of 1966, so right after recording the
Epcot pitch video, he checks himself
into the hospital where doctors find a
pretty massive tumor in his lungs. They
do emergency surgery to remove it. He
comes back to the studio afterwards and
the company announces publicly that Walt
is back. They say he's going to recover,
but the cancer is metastasized and the
doctors tell him, "Hey, you probably
only have a couple weeks or months to
live." His health goes downhill quickly.
And on December 15th, 1966,
just 10 days after his 65th birthday,
Walt Disney passes away right in the
middle of this Epcot thing. I mean, what
a sliding door moment.
He was always escalating bigger and
bigger and bigger. It would have always
been right in the middle of the biggest
thing he's ever done. That's such a good
point.
>> Mickey with Synchronized Sound, Snow
White with the first animated feature
film, the Burbank Campus, plowing cash
into all the expensive failures after
Snow White, Disneyland. Every point in
his life, he was betting the farm over
and over and over again, and he always
pushed all his chips in. It would have
always felt like this.
>> That's such a good point. If they had
pulled off the Florida project, what
would he have done next?
>> Right. Like a colony on the moon. Like
[laughter]
>> Yeah. I gotta be honest though. I will
say I don't have the faith after
watching a lot of videos and
documentaries and reading about the
Florida project. It just doesn't make
sense to me.
>> And it may have protected his legacy
that he didn't live another 10 or 20
years to see this through.
>> Yep. I mean, even just building a domed
city, like, how would you actually do
that?
>> And look, I could be completely wrong.
They invented, you know, amazing thing
after amazing thing, but this one felt
nuts.
[laughter]
>> I mean, it was I think it's a totally
fair point. So, immediately after Walt's
death, Roy renames the whole Florida
project Walt Disney World in his honor.
And Roy postpones his own retirement to
dedicate himself to finishing this
project. And in fact, just a couple
months later, in May of 1967, Roy gets
full approval from the Florida State
Legislature to build Epcot, to build
Walt Disney World, and importantly to
carve out the Reedy Creek Development
District, which gave the company a lot
more autonomy over the area containing
the land that they purchased than they
ever had in Anaheim. And famously, Walt
was very regretful that they didn't buy
up all the land around Disneyland, too,
because he just hated all of the, you
know, hotels and restaurants and crummy
stuff around there. And, uh, they run
the show there in Florida
>> that they do. But Roy is not Walt and
he's not willing to bet the company like
Walt was. So he does see Walt Disney
World through, but he dramatically
scales it back mostly because he doesn't
want to take on any additional debt for
the company. So he sets a goal that he's
going to get this thing constructed
without raising debt for the company,
>> which is unbelievable. They built the
Magic Kingdom, the Walt Disney World,
>> the theme park,
>> copy paste of Disneyland in Florida for
$400 million with two hotels and no
debt.
>> Yes. That is an incredible achievement.
Yes. And it is absolutely not what Walt
would have done.
>> Nope.
>> So, it's just the Magic Kingdom. There's
no city. There's no Epcot. There's no
airport. There's no industrial park.
It's more or less like, hey, we've got
all this land and we're extremely
confident that Disneyland is going to
work here, so we'll build it.
>> And it was extremely successful.
>> Yep.
>> But it's not betting the company. And
it's not blazing a new trail. I mean,
look, like, how could you say Disney
World isn't a success? Like, it's an
incredible success.
>> And there's like so much cool innovation
there. The underground tunnels, they
took everything about Disneyland and and
made it better. Okay, now we don't have
to have people wandering around carrying
trash bags. Okay, we don't have to have
characters appearing in the wrong land
because the only way for them to, you
know, come quote unquote on stage is
through a door that's inconveniently
placed. We've got this network of
underground tunnels where we can all do
it exactly the way that we would have
wanted to. I'm pretty sure the
underground tunnels are actually street
level and all of Disney World is up one
story. It's this like whole insane
concept of what if we could do
Disneyland over again, but not as
cowboys, as as real planners and
builders and engineers and a much bigger
budget.
>> Which may actually be, to your point,
it's probably just as likely, if not
more likely, that Walt Disney's death
when it came preserved his reputation
[laughter] and that this this might have
actually been the better path for the
Florida project.
>> May have been. Regardless though, what
it is not is shooting for the stars. And
after Walt's death, the company
basically stops doing that and every
dimension. Roy himself tragically dies 2
and a half months after opening Disney
World at the end of 1971.
>> It's kind of poetic. It seems like he he
said he was going to see this thing
through and he did.
>> And he did for his brother. Yeah.
And then what follows is basically kind
of 13 years of Disney [snorts]
becoming a parks company.
>> Yeah. I mean, if you look over at the
film side of things, the last film that
Walt worked on was Jungle Book, which
ended up coming out after his death in
1967. He was deeply involved in this
one. It was a smash hit, grossing $23
million. 23 million in its first box
office run, which implies a cut of about
$11 million for Disney and Buen a Vista
on a budget of just $4 million. This
though would be Disney's most successful
film for the next two decades.
>> Yeah. Yeah. That's bigger than
Cinderella, certainly bigger than
Sleeping Beauty, 101 Dalmatians,
any of the other movies around that era.
>> Yep. So the financials of the company
keep growing, but really it's all
because of the parks. And you can see it
when you look at the numbers. So in
1972, the first year of Disney World,
films do 78 million in revenue and 44
million in profit. Parks do a whopping
million in revenue and 38 million in
profit. And then all the rest of the
flywheel, consumer merchandising, etc.
does 27 million in revenue and 13
million in profit.
>> This is before the corporate expenses.
>> Yes, before the corporate expenses.
>> Okay. So, what are the three profit
numbers for each of those again?
>> So, you've got in 1972
44 million in profit from films.
>> Yep.
>> Biggest profit engine.
>> It's actually a lot.
>> The IP of the company is still in good
shape here in 1972. Parks do 38 million
in profit and other flywheel businesses
do 13 million in profit.
>> Okay. So parks and movies are pretty
comparable then.
>> Yes. Pretty comparable right after
Disney World opens.
>> Yep.
>> But then 12 years later, by the end of
this period in 1984,
parks and consumer products generate
$250 million of operating income on over
a billion dollars in revenue, while film
and TV
barely breaks even with only $2.2 $2
million in operating
>> income. So yeah, by the end of this
period here,
>> basically IPwise, the company is
creatively bankrupt and they're running
a parks and merch business.
>> No way. Okay, give me the profit numbers
from 1984 again.
>> So together, parks and consumer products
>> generate 250 million in operating
income. So4 billion dollars from the
parks and consumer products. and film
and TV is 2.2 million. [laughter]
>> Unbelievable.
>> It really illustrates what happens to
the company during this period.
>> It's funny because I only have the
topline numbers from all the annual
reports that we took photographs of when
we were in the archives. Revenue goes
from 100 million in 1965
to
1.4 billion in 1984. And then over on
the net income after all the corporate
expenses in 1965 goes from 11 million
all the way up to 97 million in 1984. So
if you just look at the whole business
>> yeah the consolidated financials
>> looks great but what you're sort of
illustrating is the core is rotting.
Yes. That they're not contributing new
IP onto the pile that consumers love.
Otherwise we'd be seeing that in the the
films division. Name a Disney film from
the 70s that you can even think of
today.
>> They're just harvesting over in the
parks.
>> Yes. So really the the biggest problem
what this comes down to is that American
mythmaking
moved on. It moved elsewhere. So this is
the era when George Lucas makes Star
Wars and Stephen Spielberg makes Indiana
Jones and ET and these guys become the
new American storytellers, not Disney
and not Disney animation. Disney
animation during this decade goes from a
staff of roughly 500 at the time of
Walt's death all the way down to just
125 by the early8s. There's all sorts of
problems. The films they do make are
disasters. The worst example of this is
The Black Cauldron. Did you read about
this?
>> Yeah. Wasn't it like 10 years in
development?
>> 10 years in development and production.
Ties up the studio forever. And then
when they eventually do release it in
1985, it's a total flop.
>> And it's super dark, right? It's like a
scary kids movie.
>> Yeah. It's a PG rated Disney,
>> right? It was the first one ever rated
PG.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
>> They do have some success with live
action since 1964 with the massive
success of Mary Poppins, which won five
Oscars. They kind of leaned into that
side of the house.
>> Yep. They start Touchstone Pictures and
that has a couple, you know, big hits
like Splash is a big hit for them. But
animation, the core of the company is
dying. And of course, Mary Poppins was
made
>> during Walt's life
>> with Walt's involvement before his
death.
>> But to your point all episode, you know,
great, they started Touchtone Pictures.
Great. They made 20,000 Leagues Under
the Sea and Old Yeller and The
Absent-minded Professor and
>> they made a bunch of Herby the Love Bug
liveaction movies in
>> right
>> the 60s and 70s.
>> And that's not to hate on any of these
things on their own. Like my parents
loved Herby. I I remember them talking
about it. They showed it to me when I
was a kid. Is that durable IP that feeds
>> the future of Disney? No.
>> No. No.
>> So then in 1984,
basically the inevitable happens. Wall
Street corporate raiders come gunning
for Disney. I mean, it's an easy target,
right? The financials look great.
There's a lot of net income here. And
there's also a lot of hard assets
between the parks, the real estate, the
old films in the vault. This is like
easy pickings to come in, take over the
>> super undervalued, right?
>> Yeah. I mean, the market cap of this
company is only like $2 billion despite
1.5 billion in topline revenue and call
it a hundred million in net income. But
this would be super easy to break up
Disney, sell off the theme parks, sell
off the IP to other movie studios. You
could come in and make a killing doing
this.
>> And that's what Saul Steinberg tries to
do. Come in, raid the company, break it
up for parts. But, uh, David, I I think
you're getting ahead of yourself.
>> I'm pretty sure this should be how we
start part two.
Yes, this is the story for next time,
but just know for now as a little teaser
that this period of the company ends
improbably
not with Disney being broken up, but
with three complete outsiders
coming in to run the company, none of
whom have any history in animation, any
familiarity with the flywheel business
model, or any experience or demonstrated
ability ility to operate anything
outside film and television. So like
running parks, nope. Doing merch? Nope.
Nothing. None of that.
And those three men, Michael Eisner,
Frank Wells, and Jeffrey Katzenberg,
would pull off probably the greatest
media company comeback in history. So
that's what two Paramount executives and
a lawyer turned Warner Brothers exec.
>> Yep, that's right.
>> It's like the other Hollywood Studios
executives are going to team up and come
in and save Disney.
>> Doesn't sound like it's going to work,
but we'll have to story on part two
because [laughter] boy did it ever.
>> All right. Well, should we do some
analysis?
>> Yes, absolutely. Do you still like the
thing that we did on Vanguard which is
have one big question that we we try to
answer?
>> And I think the question should be why
has nobody else built an IP flywheel
like Disney?
>> Is it as simple as Disney was the first
IP flywheel company and so they've been
the biggest? I mean that no that's not
it. But it is interesting they are the
first and they're like the biggest best
IP flywheel company at that point in
history. 1984.
>> Yeah. And I mean really like even to
today, I don't think any of the other
movie studios out there, any of the
other major studios are anywhere near as
good a business.
>> No, they're all terrible businesses.
>> Yeah. Despite having at this point going
on a hundred years of watching Disney
operate and seeing exactly how the
flywheel business model works. I mean,
the Wall Street Journal wrote that
article in 1958. Why has nobody else
copied them successfully?
>> To be fair, okay, the terrible business
thing is not fair. The business of movie
production on its own is a terrible
business, but the other studios, like,
you got to give Universal a ton of
credit.
>> And I guess that's my point. Universal
is probably the closest, but even then,
it's not Disney. I mean, isn't Universal
running effectively the the same
playbook but with less valuable IP or IP
that they don't own? So, they have to
sort of share it. Think like Harry
Potter.
>> Yep.
>> Or just at smaller scale.
>> Yeah. Still, nobody else is Disney. And
and to me, I think it all comes back to
when we first talked about the flywheel
all the way in the beginning of the
episode. I think animation is super
super key. I mean Bob Iger when he took
over the company in 2005 had that famous
quote of as animation goes so goes the
company. Yep.
>> There really is something unique about
animated IP in its timelessness, in the
ever availability of its stars, in the
better economics of not having to share
too much on the back end or in
merchandising fees, etc. with stars. And
then I think really just like the
ability of people to form deep lasting
relationships with the characters versus
live action. And because Disney's always
had animation at its core, that's what
creates all this special IP.
>> And it's all created in house. You know,
it's funny. I threw out Harry Potter.
Universal doesn't own all of the rights
to everything Harry Potter, but Disney
for sure does own all the rights to
everything Buzz Lightyear now that they
own Pixar or Aladdin or Mickey Mouse.
Like, this is true vertical integration.
>> Yes. Yes. There's also Disney, for all
its ups and downs, made the decision to
never sell its catalog, so they could
compound longer than everyone else. A
lot of these other studios have sold
their back catalogs, and some of them
are are worthless since it's live action
films and black and white that no one's
ever going to watch, but Disney hasn't.
They own everything they've ever made,
and that ties to Walt's Oswald
experience.
>> Yep. And I think there's something else
too that only comes when you really
fully embrace the flywheel business
model and the trade-offs that it
involves. And it's the vault and the
reissue strategy.
>> Yeah.
>> Disney. Let's put Marvel aside for a
minute. [laughter] Uh with the exception
of Marvel,
>> you got to put Star Wars in that pile,
too, because I know where you're going
with this. And I the way you feel about
Marvel, I feel about the um
overexloitation of Star Wars.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Great. Okay. All
right. Let's [laughter]
Let's put Star Wars aside of the pile,
too. Core Disney and Disney animation
and Pixar have been so disciplined over
the years about metering out their
content and the core delivery of that
content on an infrequent enough basis
that it doesn't dilute it. And Marvel,
ironically, I think really is the
counter example here. Yeah, it was on a
great great run, but honestly, it feels
like the Disney plusification of Marvel.
We'll get to this in the next episode,
but that my gripe would be that the
developing a lot of content to always
have something fresh there.
>> Maybe what the issue that we're both
describing is actually a blurring of
flywheel point. 2 and Flywheel 3. Point
2 was maximized distribution of each
core IP's
primary initial delivery vehicle. And
your point three was feed IP into as
many ancillary profitable flywheel nodes
as possible. Kind of feels like with
direct consumer Disney Plus, those two
things got confused. Yeah.
>> And like ah what's the difference
between ancillary content and primary
content it all ends up in the same
place. And that's kind of how I feel
when I watch some of the overexploited
IP now. M mhm. Mhm.
>> It goes back all the way back to the
point you made, I don't know, 6 hours
ago or whatever, that you you have to be
really clear about giving a nice lane
around your primary medium and delivery
vehicle. So that stuff still feels
scarce, special, and canonical.
>> Yep. Yep. Yep. But I think for every
other studio out there, their incentives
have always been and are always going to
be release as much content as quickly as
possible. Yeah. especially once they
have a franchise that's working, get the
sequels out as fast as possible and get
the sure profits from them.
>> And Disney is playing a many decade
compounding game which can take three
decades to really kick in. And all these
other studios change ownership every
decade. And so there's really not the
right like ownership incentive structure
to play a three decade game.
>> Yep. And I think this impacts the
creative decisions too because when you
don't need to release content,
you can keep working on the content and
make sure that you only release it once
it's truly great.
>> Yeah. There's one other point on this
though that we haven't really touched
on, which is universe cohesion.
>> Here's my favorite way to make the
point. What's your favorite Paramount
song?
>> Right. Yeah. No idea. The Top Gun theme
song. What's your favorite Universal
song?
>> Right. Yeah.
>> But like everyone's got a litany of
answers to what's your favorite Disney
song. Yes.
>> They actually managed to associate all
of this love and heritage and fandom and
universe interaction with the studio
itself.
>> It's back to becoming the lifesavers of
animation.
>> Yep.
>> So, okay, as I was thinking about this,
I was trying to ask myself, are there
any other companies in the broader
>> entertainment landscape? Ah, you got it.
[laughter] That do this. I thought I was
going to get you.
Which is so great because Nintendo and
Disney, you know, Nintendo started on
the back of Disney, right? As we talked
about on our Nintendo episodes, right?
It was the Disney license for the
playing cards in Japan that kicked off
modern Nintendo.
>> Yep.
>> Yes. But yes, they have the exact same
ethos
>> and flywheel.
>> But interestingly, they sort of don't
play together now. I mean, that's the
thing about vertically integrated
companies is they don't really work
together,
>> right? And Nintendo has partnered with
Universal now for their perks. I kind of
suspect the way that a relationship
between Disney and Nintendo,
the only way it could work would be if
one of them buys the other,
>> right?
>> Yep.
>> Great. Seven powers.
>> Great. So listeners, this is the part of
the show where we walk through Hamilton
Helmer's seven powers framework that
effectively helps analyze why does a
business get to be more profitable than
its nearest competitor and do so
sustainably. And those seven are scale
economies, network economies,
counterpositioning, switching costs,
branding, cornered resource, and process
power. And I think we're just analyzing
this for pre984 Disney.
>> Yep. Well, easy one to start with.
Counterpositioning for days. Being
willing to invest in a featurelength
animated picture. I mean, that was the
peak of this relative to anybody else
doing animation leading up to Snow
White,
>> right? Cuz their competitive set would
have needed to be people who have the
talent of their animation staff, which
is not zero people, but few people, and
who had all the cash from Mickey and the
Mickey merch, which would have been
almost no one. I don't know, actually.
That's almost like capital as a moat to
go pursue Snow White cuz they weren't
there was no one else who really could
have done it.
>> Mhm. You know what? You're right. Versus
the other animation studios, but Disney
was counterpositioned, I think, versus
the big liveaction studios because they
never would have made a three-year $1.5
million investment in a film when it was
>> nor they have the capability though.
>> Yep.
>> So, let's see. early on. I mean,
branding pretty quickly played a role as
soon as Mickey Mouse was established.
>> Walt Disney production. Absolutely.
>> Yeah. Yeah. You'd pay more for a Walt
Disney production than than others.
>> It was brand for Disney itself.
>> I wonder if there was process power.
Reading in some of the old recollections
of animators, it seems like there were
people that kind of traded between
studios and left and started rival
studios and they were able to produce
great work. So, maybe there's not
process power. M
>> I mean the the big two once it started
to really kick in are scale economies
and network economies. The flywheel is
sort of all about that. The these films
are all scale economies. It's can I go
plop down $6 million and then get the
entire world to care about my movie for
a year and make as much as possible on
that and then expand it out into the
flywheel and take advantage of all those
ancillary streams. And then of course
the network economies of if you have a
big enough release, it is a cultural
moment. Yeah. It matters to the world,
>> right? Gosh, I see it with my girls now
today buying, you know, the Aurora
costume that their friends also have so
that they can dress up and play
together. Yeah. The flywheel is built on
network economies. It's like a
combination of scale economies and
network economies. Scale economies to
enable the investment in the IP and then
network economies across all of the
nodes. But the whole thing, if you were
to go ask that question of why isn't
another company able to replicate the
success of Disney to any of the very
smart executives and their great teams
that work at competitive companies, they
would say, "Oh, cuz Disney has the
cornered resource of all that IP." And
like, what do you want me to do? I can't
devise a strategy that's going to work
in the next 5 to 10 years to suddenly
beat Disney when they have a hundred
years of heritage and the world caring
about their IP. The entire thing is
predicated on that.
>> Yep. Yep. Which really comes down to
Walt always playing the long game and
always being willing
>> to bet the whole farm.
>> Yep.
>> And being right enough times and
managing to survive through the times
where he was wrong that it worked.
>> Yep. All right, Quintessence.
>> Yes. So mine is Disney managed to take
not only a set of IP and build their
flywheel, but a cohesive set of IP, an
opinionated universe of timeless stories
about durable, emotional story arcs that
are universally applicable that work
together as one. And that is something
that can stay relevant and of course
monetize for a very long time across
generations. They can't fully avoid
being a hitbased business. They are a
movie studio, but they've gotten about
as far away from it as they possibly
can.
>> It's funny listening to you say that. I
think that entire passage could equally
apply to Nintendo.
>> Yeah.
>> Which really just shows how the
companies, they are the two flywheel
companies. They are the two intellectual
property flywheel companies out there.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. Okay, so my quintessence goes all
the way back to the beginning of the
episode and Marceline.
>> Of course it does.
>> Art and commerce. Those two things got
married in Walt's head when he was a
little kid. And that is Disney. It
really is art. When Disney is at its
best, what they make is not just a
commercial product. It exists at a
higher level than that.
And it is married to this incredible
commerce engine that is in of itself
beautiful and like Disneyland and Disney
World and all the parks are the most
perfect expression of that
>> in it sounds exactly right. The
sightelines man the the I I like going
to Disneyland just to walk around. It's
the craziest thing. I the rides are free
and I have just as much fun not going on
them even though I've already paid for
them. Any parent who's been to Disney
with their kids knows exactly what I'm
talking about. And it is like
irreplicable at any other company or
place in the world. All right, before we
do carveouts, I've got one fun little
thing that didn't make the narrative.
So, when Disney launched Donald Duck in
1934, they hired radio actor Clarence
Nash to do his voice. Do you know how
Clarence Nash got his start doing Animal
Voices on the radio?
You won't guess it, but it's an awesome
acquired crossover.
>> He was the radio spokesperson for Ador
Dairy Farms. Whoa.
>> In Southern California.
>> Trader Joe's.
>> Trader Joe's. [laughter]
>> That's awesome.
>> Crossover. Trader Joe's. Donald Duck.
There you go. Trader Joe's original milk
supplier before they got bought by
Trader Joe's competitor 7-Eleven.
>> Yep, that's right. And of course, Trader
Joe's itself was in part inspired by the
Enchanted Tiki Room at Disneyland.
>> That's right. Which we didn't talk
about, but Walt also owned that
personally. It opened in ' 63. He put up
the capital for it. I think Wed owned
it. And it was ticketed separately. I
think it was like an extra 75 cents or
something to go to Walt Disney's
personal tiki room, which is why it's
named
>> the Tiki Room. That's right. All right.
Carveouts, what you got?
>> All right. Followup to yours from the
Vanguard episode. The shoes, Brooks
Vanguards are indeed great. I ordered a
pair. They're excellent. Uh I'm not
wearing them today because they're not
squishy enough to stand for whatever
we're at 9 hours.
>> Yes. But they are great shoes. I got two
pairs.
>> I wear them around the neighborhood.
They're awesome. I have two YouTube
channels.
>> Oo, nice.
>> One is Defunct Land.
>> I used to watch this channel all the
time. I forgot about it for a while and
then I rediscovered it while we were
doing research. It is the stories of
either defunct or neverbuilt theme parks
and it walks you through the insanity of
action park in where is that? New
Jersey.
>> Yep, I think that's right.
>> Tons of great Disney ones, Disney parks
that were never built. There's a great
one on the the Florida project. So, I
highly recommend defunct Land. My second
one is Animagraphs.
>> There's not a lot of videos on this
channel, but they're all so cool. It is
3D models explained by a narrator of how
really interesting pieces of machinery
work. I've used it for at least two
episodes that I can think of off the top
of my head. One, how a mechanical watch
works and two, how a Formula 1 car
works. I highly recommend the channel,
Animagraphs. It is awesome.
>> I also have two carveouts. My first one
is we got a new car,
>> a Volvo EX30.
>> The little guy.
>> The little guy. A, it is awesome. It's
like the perfect car for San Francisco.
It fits in tight parking spaces, but it
can hold my whole family, hold a bunch
of gear. B, oh my god, Chinese EVs are
incredible. So Volvo is owned by Giley,
which is a Chinese company, and the EX30
is a Gily
platform EV with Volvo branding, unlike
the other Volvo cars. I
>> mean, this thing is crazy. It only costs
like $35,000. And it's awesome.
Unfortunately, that leads to C, which is
Volvo just canceled it in the US right
after I got it. Yeah, I think because of
tariffs. Yeah.
>> Oh,
>> it is an amazing car. You can no longer
buy it in the US, but you can
internationally.
>> It was a short window.
>> And like, man, I get Chinese EVs now.
This is a really, really good car for
not a lot of money. Okay, my second
carve out is the San Francisco Symphony.
Jenny and I went the other night. They
have a new music director coming in,
Ellen Chan, and this was her first
performance since being named music
director. She's awesome. She's 39 years
old. She's so much fun and so much
energy. And going to the symphony, which
I hadn't been in forever, made me
realize that actually through classical
animation, I got a ton of exposure to
classical music growing up. I think more
than anything else, like through Disney
films and Looney Tunes and Warner
Brothers, I was just sitting there like,
man, I feel like I should be watching
some animation right now. [laughter]
>> Awesome. All right. Well, we have got
some thank yous to people who helped us
with our research. But first, to our
partners this season. JP Morgan,
trusted, reliable payments
infrastructure for your business, no
matter the scale. JPorggan.com/acquired
to Verscell, the developer tools and
cloud infrastructure to build and scale
fast, secure applications on the web.
Verscell.com/acquired
to Service Now, the platform that puts
AI to work for people. Service
Now.com/acquired. and Statsig, bringing
experimentation, feature flags, and
product analytics into one unified
system for product teams.
statsig.com/acquired.
Thanks to all four of these companies
for being awesome partners with us this
season as we wrap here with this finale
and leave you with a cliffhanger here
over the summer when we'll be back for
our fall season in August.
>> Disney part two.
>> Yes,
>> the Renaissance.
>> Ben and David will return.
>> Yes. As always, thank you to all of our
sources, the books that we read for this
episode. They're all linked in the show
notes, and a special thank you to Arvin
Navaratnam at Worldly Partners for his
great write up on Disney, linked in the
show notes. Arvin, for folks that don't
know, is at Worldly Partners, which is a
long-term investment firm focused on
multi-deade compounding businesses. Very
sympatico here with Acquired. Learn more
at worldlypartners.com.
He provided us with the data on the rise
of televisions. Actually, some annual
reports that we were missing even from
our time in the Disney archives for the
original offering document for Disney
selling shares to the public. All sorts
of awesome stuff. Personally, thank you
to Jeffrey Katzenberg. We had a great
breakfast when I was down in Burbank and
helped us out a lot with research and
you'll hear a lot more about him on part
two. to Josh Dearo, the new CEO of the
Walt Disney Company, for his time
chatting through some stuff that we were
wrestling with and helping us with
research. Also to Nancy Lee and all the
Disney folks in the archives, animation
research library and all the other great
folks in Burbank we met with on our
research trip.
>> That really was incredible. Thank you to
all of you.
>> To Mike Miller, former Wall Street
Journal editor and now frequently
helping us with acquired episodes. Mike,
you are awesome. to Graden who
emailed us last year with the
observation that the entire business
community misuses the phrase flywheel.
>> Yes.
>> Appreciate your your help, Graden.
>> Glad we finally found the perfect
episode to bring this up.
>> Yes. Well, speaking of the Wall Street
Journal, thank you to Ben Cohen and
Emily Nelson over there who helped us
track down the original Flywheel
article. We will link to that in the
show notes. Can't wait to share it with
all of you. to Mitch Laskkey, our friend
Mitch Laskkey, former partner at
Benchmark, who helped me think through a
whole bunch of the flywheel dynamics. To
Ryan Shear, who is Walt's greatgrandson
and is on the board of the Walt Disney
Family Museum here in San Francisco,
which really is a excellent museum, and
it's done by the family. It's about
Walt, the person. Highly recommend going
to see it next time you are in San
Francisco. If you like this episode, go
check out our recent episodes on
Vanguard, Ferrari, and Coca-Cola. And
back in the archives, our two-part
series on Nintendo. I think a lot of
that is going to rhyme with Disney.
>> Indeed.
>> You can click the show notes to get
access to the PDF companion with
visuals, charts, tables, and
illustrations of key concepts. You can
also get it by joining our email list,
acquired.fm/e.
It's where we send out our takeaways
from each episode, past episode
corrections, behind the scenes photos,
and it's where you can vote on future
episode topics. Plus, we give away a
little hint each time. acquire.fm/e.
And we are writing in the Wall Street
Journal. You can get access to read the
columns at acquire.fm/wsj.
And if you sign up there, we will email
you every time the column comes out and
we will make sure that you get an
unpaywalled link. So whether or not you
were a journal subscriber, if you were
on that list, acquire.fm/wsj,
you can always be able to read our
article.
>> Every time we make an episode, we write
an article now.
>> And with that, listeners, we'll see you
next time.
>> We'll see you back here this fall for
Disney part two.
>> Yes.
>> Who got the truth?
Is it you? Is it you? Is it you? Who got
the truth [music] now? Huh?
>> [music]